Published in: 2019 Annual IEEE International Systems Conference (SysCon)
DOI: 10.1109/SYSCON.2019.8836786

System-of-Systems Modeling, Analysis and
Optimization of Hybrid Vehicular Trafﬁc

Benjamin Sliwa1 , Thomas Liebig2 , Tim Vranken3 , Michael Schreckenberg3 and Christian Wietfeld1

1Communication Networks Institute, 2Department of Computer Science VIII
TU Dortmund University, 44227 Dortmund, Germany
e-mail: {Benjamin.Sliwa, Thomas.Liebig, Christian.Wietfeld}@tu-dortmund.de
3Physics of Transport and Trafﬁc, University Duisburg-Essen, Germany
e-mail: {Vranken, Schreckenberg}@ptt.uni-due.de

9
1
0
2

v
o

N

1
2

]
I

N

.

s

c

[

2
v
5
2
0
3
0

.

1
0
9
1

:

v

i

X

r

a

Abstract—While the development of fully autonomous ve-
hicles is one of the major research ﬁelds in the Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITSs) domain,
the upcoming long-
term transition period – the hybrid vehicular trafﬁc – is often
neglected. However, within the next decades, automotive systems
with heterogeneous autonomy levels will share the same road
network, resulting in new problems for trafﬁc management
systems and communication network infrastructure providers.
In this paper, we identify key challenges of
the upcoming
hybrid trafﬁc scenario and present a system-of-systems model,
which brings together approaches and methods from trafﬁc
modeling, data science, and communication engineering in order
to allow data-driven trafﬁc ﬂow optimization. The proposed
model consists of data acquisition, data transfer, data analysis,
and data exploitation and exploits real world sensor data as
well as simulative optimization methods. Based on the results of
multiple case studies, which focus on individual challenges (e.g.,
resource-efﬁcient data transfer and dynamic routing of vehicles),
we point out approaches for using the existing infrastructure with
a higher grade of efﬁciency.

I . IN TRODUC T ION AND R E LATED WORK

Autonomous vehicles are often envisioned as the savior
that solves all issues [1] of current trafﬁc systems. They are
expected to be able to drive with minimum safety distances
even at high speeds, which enables massive increases of the
usable road capacity. They do not dawdle, which results in
a better trafﬁc ﬂow and they coordinate their actions for an
improved overall safety.
While this sophisticated vision is supported by many current
research works [2], most of them neglect the more immediate
challenges arising from the transition period from legacy trafﬁc
to highly automated vehicular trafﬁc that will take several
decades. Due to the step-wise development and deployment of
automated vehicles, systems with different levels of autonomy
will coexist within the same road network in the hybrid
vehicular trafﬁc [3]. In this complex scenario, the following
challenges for trafﬁc ﬂow optimization arise:
• Novel trafﬁc phenomenons as automated vehicles are
expected to react defensively on human misbehavior,
potentially resulting in trafﬁc ﬂow reductions, while the
overall trafﬁc congestion grows, e.g., due to an increased
amount of empty runnings and on-demand trafﬁc.

• Heterogeneous communication technologies limit the

capabilities for mutual coordination and data provision-
ing.
• Resource competition as the radio spectrum is shared
between the different technologies and human cell users
as well as automated systems.
• Trafﬁc management systems have to work with incom-
plete information, since established sensors systems
only provide local coverage and often break during their
operational time.

Existing approaches for modeling these trafﬁc systems have
not yet reached the required complexity that allows the deriva-
tion of novel insights for hybrid trafﬁc ﬂow optimization.
In [4], the authors propose an approach to model different
automation levels depending on their resulting safety dis-
tance. Another approach [5] proposes an extension of the
well-established Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) to consider
cooperative behaviors for lane-merging. While forecast and
optimization of vehicular trafﬁc ﬂow has traditionally been
isolatedly addressed by the trafﬁc physics community, the
arising challenges of the hybrid trafﬁc scenario require the
joint consideration of communication systems and data anal-
ysis methods [6]. In this paper, we present an overall system-
of-systems model that brings together the three mentioned
disciplines for modeling and analyzing hybrid vehicular trafﬁc
with the goal of data-driven trafﬁc ﬂow optimization. The

Fig. 1. Hybrid vehicular trafﬁc: Coexistence of different vehicle types and
communication technologies.

c(cid:13) 2019 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses,
including reprinting/republishing this material for adver tising or promotional purposes, collecting new collected works
for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

4G/5GRadio-ﬁngerprinting Systemfor Vehicle ClassiﬁcationDifferentTechnologies Operate inthe same Frequency BandHuman-drivencarRobo TaxiV2V-DirectDataAnalysis,Trafﬁc Forecastand ControlIEEE 802.15.44G/5GIEEE 802.11pActive xFCDTransmission 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Overall system architecture model for data-driven optimization of hybrid trafﬁc consisting of data acquisition, data transfer, data analysis and data
optimization. Real world sensor data is exploited to generate new trafﬁc models, which are evaluated and optimized using a simulation setup. The derived
insights are then utilized for trafﬁc ﬂow optimization in real world trafﬁc management systems.

concepts are substantiated by preliminary results of different
case studies that focus on individual aspects such as resource-
efﬁcient data transfer and trafﬁc bottleneck detection. The
proposed approach leverages ubiquitous machine learning to
derive novel insights within all of its main dimensions, which
are deﬁned as data acquisition, data transfer, data analysis and
data exploitation.
Fig. 1 shows an example scenario and illustrates the dif-
ferent kinds of heterogeneity within hybrid trafﬁc scenarios.
While highly automated vehicles (so-called robo taxis) are
exploited as moving sensor nodes that provide sensor mea-
surements as extended Floating Car Data (xFCD) via different
kinds of Vehicle-to-everything (V2X) connections on their
own, legacy vehicles are detected and classiﬁed based on
roadside infrastructure systems.
The structure of the paper is as follows. After presenting the
challenges and discussing relevant state-of-the-art research, we
present the architecture model of the proposed overall system.
The different submodules are explained in details and set into
relation to the overall context and existing approaches. Finally,
multiple case-studies that provide groundwork for the different
components of the overall system are presented and selected
results are discussed.

I I . SY ST EM MODE L ARCH I T EC TUR E

In this section, the system architecture and the features of
the individual components are explained. An illustration of
the overall system architecture model is shown in Fig. II.
For the proposed data-driven approach, trafﬁc data is acquired
in the real world, transfered to the analysis centers, utilized

for model generation and simulative optimization and ﬁnally
exploited for improving the real world trafﬁc ﬂow. In the over-
all scenario, communication systems and machine learning-
based data analysis are of great importance. One the one
hand, communication is used as a mediator between data
acquisition, data analysis and data exploitation, on the other
hand, it is subject to machine learning-based optimization
itself (cf. Sec. III-B). The following paragraphs provide further
information about exemplary groundwork for the key system
stages data acquisition, data transfer, data analysis and data
exploitation. In addition, groundwork that addresses the related
challenges is introduced and discussed.

A. Data Acquisition
The derivation of new models and the following trafﬁc
ﬂow optimization requires real world trafﬁc data as a solid
foundation. Therefore, the accurate acquisition of trafﬁc data
is of tremendous importance for the overall system. Depending
on the considered road network type, the degrees of freedom
for the vehicular mobility and the resulting challenges for
the trafﬁc ﬂow analysis can be signiﬁcantly different. Con-
sequently, trafﬁc is analyzed isolatedly for highway, suburban
and inner city scenarios as well as in an overall model, which
considers all trafﬁc types. For the acquisition of actual sensor
data, a combination of different real world sensor systems is
applied, which includes existing traditional sensors as well as
experimental approaches that offer novel acquisition methods
and are capable of opening up new data categories. Traditional
sensor systems (e.g., induction loops) are intended to acquire
trafﬁc parameters such as trafﬁc ﬂow and density. Due to

DataAnalysisTrafﬁcSensorsVehicle-as-a-sensorEstablishedStatic SensorsRadio-ﬁngerprintingTrafﬁcScenariosSuburbanInner CityDataAcquisitionImputation ofMissing DataTrafﬁcAnalysisData TransferVehicle-basedIntelligent RoutingInfrastrcuture-basedDynamic LaneDirectionsDynamicType-speciﬁcLane ClearanceData ExploitationAnticipatory CommunicationSensorDataHighwayJoint Simulation of Mobilityand CommunicationShortTerm PredictionsDataFormatHeterogeneous Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) Communication4G5GITS G5Link Lifetime Prediction andNetwork QualityAssessmentQUICInterfaceSelectionCellularWiFi-basedAd-hocmmWave BeamsMobilityPredictionConnectivityMapsRayTracingwith HD MapsContext-awareness and -predictionOpportunisticDataTransferCooperativeBeam SteeringMobility-awareData RoutingTrafﬁcModelingClosed MicroscopicHybridTrafﬁc ModelControlRecom-menda-tionsSec. IV-ACase StudyDataData-drivenminimization ofthe overall dwelltimeOptimization ofthe resource-efﬁciency of datatransmissionsResearch GoalTrafﬁc PhysicsMachineLearningCommunicationEngineeringReinforcementLearningSystem DesignTrafﬁc DynamicsData RatePredictionVehicleDistributionDwellTimeAnalysisDetection ofBottlenecksCompetence FieldSec. IV-BPlatooningEstimation of non-observed DataVehicle InteractionsSINR [dB]40-10Sec. IV-BSINRTransmissionNetworkCodingMulti-interface CommunicationSec. IV-CSec. IV-C024050010001500Count (        )1000the required road work, sensor deployments are cost-intense,
which results in limitations for the number of deployments and
the resulting sensor coverage. However, since many existing
trafﬁc monitoring systems rely on these approaches, they are
integrated into the system model in order to beneﬁt from the
existing infrastructure. In addition to these established sensor
systems, novel methods allow the acquisition of additional
trafﬁc parameters (e.g., vehicle type distributions), which
enables new approaches for trafﬁc ﬂow optimization.
1) Vehicle-as-a-sensor: Vehicular crowdsensing [7] marks
a paradigm shift from static sensor installations to exploiting
the vehicles themselves as moving sensor nodes, resulting in
massive improvements for coverage and data freshness. Using
a multitude of specialized sensors, vehicles can be utilized to
provide meaningful trafﬁc parameters as well as environmental
information, e.g., to detect trafﬁc obstructions or free parking
slots. Apart from the considered trafﬁc management scenario,
this approach has been demonstrated to signiﬁcantly improve
distributed weather prognosis [2], road condition sensing [8]
and inner city air quality monitoring.
Vehicular crowdsensing is closely connected to the data
transfer topic, as it relies on connectivity and the presence of
a data uplink. Moreover, large-scale deployments of crowd-
sensing services lead to massive increases in the amount of
transmitted data, which imply novel challenges on the network
infrastructure side (see Sec. III-B).
2) Novel Roadside Sensors: In order to enable promising
trafﬁc optimization methods like type-speciﬁc lane clearance,
trafﬁc management systems need to obtain information about
the distributions of vehicle types. A multitude of different
sensor types for vehicle classiﬁcation has been proposed,
which ranges from vision-based approaches using cameras,
radars and lasers to inertial measuring units. A comprehensive
overview about existing sensor technologies is presented in [9].
However, none of the existing technologies is able to fulﬁll
all requirements for accuracy, privacy preservation, weather
robustness while still being cost-efﬁciently enough to allow
citywide large-scale deployments.
In Sec.
III-A, we present a case study on radio-
ﬁngerprinting-based vehicles classiﬁcation. The proposed sys-
tem can be deployed cost-efﬁciently in an ad-hoc manner
and is able to provide a high classiﬁcation accuracy even at
challenging environmental conditions.

B. Data Transfer

Alongside with the coexistence of the different autonomy
levels comes the coexistence of different communication
technologies,
that compete over the available resources in
the shared radio medium. Within the proposed system for
hybrid vehicular trafﬁc analysis, data needs to be exchanged
from the cars to the cloud-based data analytics center and
between individual vehicles for mutual coordination. The
challenges arising from highly-dynamic network topologies,
heterogeneous communication technologies and challenging
environments are addressed by the combined usage of two

main methodological approaches: Anticipatory communication
and heterogeneous V2X.
1) Anticipatory Communication: The anticipatory network-
ing paradigm [10] aims to integrate the communication context
into the decision processes within communication systems
themselves. Instead of extending the network capacity phys-
ically on the infrastructure side, the existing network itself
is used in a more efﬁcient way through a context-aware
medium access. In the considered vehicular scenario,
the
dynamics of the communication medium are closely connected
to the vehicles mobility behavior. Therefore, for forecasting
the network quality a car is going to encounter in the future,
trajectory prediction is a basic requirement [11].
For
improving the coexistence of different
resource-
consuming entities, the resource-efﬁciency of their individual
data transmissions needs to be optimized. Resource-efﬁcient
communication has several dimensions: Data transmissions
need to be short (high data rates) in order to free the occupied
resources as soon as possible, they have to be reliable (low
amount of retransmissions) and they have to satisfy the data
freshness requirements of the intended application. Although
different indicators exist for assessing the current network
quality of a given communication technology, the validity of
the indicators is related to the channel coherence time and
the transmission patterns of the application itself. Machine
learning has been demonstrated [12] to be able to efﬁciently
consider hidden interdependencies between those aspects, re-
sulting in an improved context-awareness. In Sec. III-B, we
present a case study for resource-efﬁcient sensor data trans-
mission based on machine learning and mobility prediction.
In addition to optimizing the resource-efﬁciency of data
transmissions, anticipatory communication can serve as a
method to establish robust communication paths within vehic-
ular mesh networks. Here, the consideration of the mobility
characteristics of the vehicles allows to derive link-lifetime
estimations that enables the predictive optimization of multi-
hop routes [12]. With the deployments of 5G communication
networks and the millimeter Wave (mmWave) technology,
context-aware networking becomes a native aspect of mobile
networking, since the extremely high directed radio beams
need to be precisely steered towards their moving receiver.
2) Heterogeneous V2X: As it
is expected that vehicles
will make use of a combination of different
technologies
for speciﬁc use-cases [13] – e.g., low-latency ad-hoc com-
munication for safety-related messaging and high data rate
cellular communication for sensor data transfer – the unique
technological properties can be exploited for dynamic tech-
nology selection. Moreover, for each data transfer, the cur-
rently used communication technology is chosen in a context-
aware manner, e.g., available Road Side Units (RSUs) are
opportunistically exploited as cost-efﬁcient internet gateways.
Anticipatory communication methods are applied to chose the
respective technology in a predictive manner with respect to
the application requirements, e.g., through prediction of link
availability times. In addition, multi-interface communication
using network coding [14] and Quick UDP Internet Connec-

tions (QUIC) is applied in order to utilize multiple links in
parallel.

C. Data Analysis
In the context of the proposed overall system, data analysis
is utilized for simulative trafﬁc ﬂow optimization as well as
for the generation of hybrid trafﬁc models themselves. Before
the required trafﬁc properties are analyzed, the acquired sensor
data is utilized to derive estimations about the trafﬁc situation
at non-observed measurement locations in order to obtain an
improved awareness of the overall system dynamics.
1) Imputation of Missing Data: Trafﬁc volume estimation
is a fundamental
task in macroscopic street-based trafﬁc
analysis systems and has important applications, e.g., quality-
of-service evaluation,
location evaluation or risk analysis.
Nowadays, intelligent transportation systems rely on stationary
sensors, which provide trafﬁc volume measurements at prede-
ﬁned locations. However, imputation of the unobserved trafﬁc
ﬂow values and short-term predictions are highly important
research topics.
Existing literature distinguishes between average daily traf-
ﬁc (ADT) estimation and average annual daily trafﬁc ﬂow
(AADT or AADF) estimation. Whereas AADF focuses on
estimation of a trafﬁc volume depending on the day of the year,
ADT estimation provides an average for a particular day. In
contrast to the ADT and AADF problem, also short-term trafﬁc
prognosis problems exist. In AADT, we concentrate on more
extended temporal resolutions, where microscopic inﬂuences,
e.g., signals have no impact on the trafﬁc ﬂow. For short-term
prediction problems, we point the interested reader on related
works, e.g., Cellular Automaton [15], Poisson Dependency
Networks [16], or Convolutional Neural Networks [17].
A naive approach for AADF estimation is the utilization
of ordinary linear regression (OLR) [18]. Street segment
attributes (e.g. the number of lanes or function classes) are
multiplied by weights, which are subject for least squares
regression. Improvements of this technique were achieved by
respecting the geographical space by usage of geographically
weighted regression (GWR) [18] and by application of k-
nearest neighbor approaches (kNN) [19]. In [20] the AADF
prediction of kNN for a particular location is improved by
weighting measurements by their temporal distance to the
prediction time. This approach showed better results than
the application of Gaussian maximum likelihood (GML) ap-
proaches for weighting of the historical data points.
Being a spatial regression problem, usage of the Kriging
method seems to be a natural choice to tackle the AADF prob-
lem. This was successfully carried on at University of Texas
[21], [22]. To machine learning persons the Kriging method is
better known as Gaussian Process Regression, which allows
a better understanding of the underlying spatial correlation
model by reformulation with a kernel matrix. Application of
Gaussian Process Regression is an appealing state-of-the-art
method that outperforms recent methods [23]. The method
bases on a covariance matrix that denotes the correlations
among the trafﬁc ﬂux values at various locations. The work

in [23] tested various covariance matrices among them some
that incorporate spatial layout of the sensor locations or even
the topology of the street network. However, the performance
did not change much for these different correlation models.
However, due to the computational complexity of Gaussian
Process Regression, application to urban areas was restricted
either to small sites or a sample of locations [24].
2) Trafﬁc Modeling and Analysis: Although a wide range
of different macro- and microscopical trafﬁc models exist,
a closed model for hybrid vehicular trafﬁc is still missing.
Therefore, the insights of the data acquisition and the data
transfer stages shall be brought together to extend existing
cellular automaton models [25] to consider different levels of
automation.
3) Integrated Joint Simulation of Mobility and Communi-
cation: As pointed out in the previous paragraphs, modeling
hybrid vehicular trafﬁc requires the consideration of trafﬁc
modeling, data analysis and communication. For the simulative
evaluation and optimization, a common simulation setup that
is able to consider all of the individual aspects needs to be
created. Current approaches for simulating vehicular networks
often rely on coupling specialized simulation frameworks
based on an interprocess-communication approach [26]. As
a result,
the access to information of a speciﬁc domain
(e.g., using mobility information from the trafﬁc simulator for
decisions in the network simulator) is complicated, as speciﬁed
interfaces and communication protocols are used for the data
exchange. In contrast to that, the proposed system model relies
on an integrated approach based on Lightweight ICT-centric
Mobility Simulation (LIMoSim) [27], which makes use of a
shared codebase approach for all different modules.

D. Data Exploitation
Although a naive approach to increase the road capacity is
to construct additional road infrastructure, it is highly cost-
intense and often not even applicable due to space limitation,
especially in inner city scenarios. Therefore, a more preferable
way is to utilize the existing road network in a more efﬁcient
way. In the proposed overall system, this approach is addressed
by infrastructure- and vehicle based methods, which exploit
the results of the previous data analysis stage.
1) Infrastructure-based Methods:
Infrastructure-based
methods are centralized approaches,
therefore the trafﬁc
management system is able to send control commands directly
to the corresponding road infrastructure, which then executes
the intended action. Assigning the directionality of lanes
with respect to the capacity requirements provides a method
for better coping with temporal-limited phenomenons (e.g.,
commuter trafﬁc) of trafﬁc systems. Another optimization
approach is to use lanes exclusively for certain vehicle types.
Based on the obtained knowledge about the distribution of
vehicle types, lanes can be dynamically assigned, e.g., for
dividing passenger cars and heavy vehicles. Moreover, the
same approach can be applied for dividing non-automated
and highly-automated vehicles, which reduces the need
for cross-automation-level coordination and enables trafﬁc

systems to beneﬁt more from the advantages of automated
vehicles.
2) Vehicle-based Methods: Vehicle-based methods are de-
centralized approaches, therefore trafﬁc management systems
are only able to send recommendations to the vehicles, which
then may react accordingly or not. Moreover, in the considered
hybrid trafﬁc scenario not all vehicles are equipped with
communication technology.
Autonomous cars can also leverage the vast amount of
data in our scenario resulting from sensors, imputations and
predictions and apply these data for short-term navigation
decisions, i.e., which direction to chose at a particular junction
for not to generate or participate in a trafﬁc congestion. This
routing optimization approach was tested with bandit learning
in [28] and achieved increased trafﬁc network performance.
In [29], multiple trip planing methods, which aim to better
distribute the trafﬁc ﬂow over the system are investigated. The
case study in Sec. III-C provides a methodological summary
of the mentioned paper.
Another promising method for trafﬁc ﬂow optimization,
which is especially interesting for freight trafﬁc, is the us-
age of platooning, where vehicles coordinate their velocity
characteristics to achieve minimal safety distances. Additional
beneﬁts are expected for combining platooning methods with
exclusive lanes for platoons.

I I I . GROUNDWORK AND CA SE S TUD I E S

In this section, we present multiple case studies that provide
groundwork for isolated research ﬁelds in the considered
overall system model.

A. Data Acquisition: Radio-ﬁngerprinting-based Vehicle Clas-
siﬁcation
In this case study, we present example results of our research
work on radio-ﬁngerprinting-based vehicle classiﬁcation. The
integration of class-speciﬁc trafﬁc analysis allows to utilize
promising trafﬁc ﬂow optimization techniques such as dy-
namic type-speciﬁc lane clearance. The proposed system aims
to provide a highly-accurate low-cost alternative to existing
sensor systems. Within the considered hybrid trafﬁc scenario,
the system closes the gap between connected vehicles, which
are able to provide class information on their own, and non-
connected vehicles, which have to be detected using roadside
infrastructure systems. In [30], we have proposed initial work
for a radio-ﬁngerprinting system, which leverages the idea of
radio tomography for vehicle classiﬁcation and can be cost-
efﬁciently deployed in an ad-hoc manner without requiring
additional roadwork. The proposed system consists of low-cost
communicating sensor nodes that are installed into delineator
posts. Three transmitters continuously send data to three
receivers on the other road side, which monitor the Received
Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) of all links. Vehicles pass-
ing the sensor installation attenuate the signals, whereas the
attenuation level and the duration of the attenuation phase
is related to the vehicle shape. Therefore, the time series
values of all nine links are utilized as a vehicle class-speciﬁc

Fig. 3. System model for radio-ﬁngerprinting-based vehicle classiﬁcation.

Fig. 4. Confusion matrices for L1/L2 SVM-based binary vehicle classiﬁca-
tion. (C: Car-like, T: Truck Like)

radio ﬁngerprint. The attenuation pattern itself is utilized for
machine learning-based vehicle classiﬁcation. Fig. 3 shows
the system model for the radio-ﬁngerprinting-based vehicle
classiﬁcation system. For the data acquisition, an experimental
deployment of the proposed system at the entrance of a rest
area on the German highway A9 within an ofﬁcial test ﬁeld
by the German Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital
Infrastructure is used. During the training phase, the measured
nine-dimensional time series traces are labeled manually based
on camera images. The classiﬁcation can be performed directly
on the raw values as well as on a reduced feature set, which
uses analytical properties of the different signals. In [30], a
detailed comparison of different machine learning models is
provided. Fig. 4 shows the empirical results for L1/L2 SVM-
based approach for a data set consisting of more than 2500
real world measurements. For the binary classiﬁcation task
between car-like and truck-like vehicles, a total classiﬁcation
accuracy of 98.2 % is achieved.
With respect to the context of the overall hybrid trafﬁc
system, it is assumed that sensor sites exploit their obtained
data locally, e.g., for parking space accounting, and contribute
themselves to the global trafﬁc knowledge data base through
a network connection.

Sensor InstallationField Deployment SetupSchematicsIEEE 802.15.4 LinkMachine Learning-based ClassiﬁcationClassiﬁcation ResultTruck-likeCar-likeClassiﬁcation Pipeline0200400600800100012001400160018002000Time [ms]-90-80-70-60-50-40-30RSSI[dBm]Feature ExtractionMachine Learning ModelRaw attenuation data0.980.010.020.99CTCT0.960.010.040.99CTCTRaw DataReducedFeature SetBased on the transmission schemes CAT and pCAT [31],
which perform data transmissions with respect to the measured
Signal-to-noise-plus-interference Ratio (SINR), we developed
Machine Learning-based CAT (ML-CAT) [32] and ML-pCAT
[11], which use machine learning-based data rate prediction
as a metric for opportunistic data transfer. The prediction
leverages the Long Term Evolution (LTE) downlink indicators
Reference Signal Received Power (RSRP), Reference Signal
Received Quality (RSRQ), SINR, Channel Quality Indicator
(CQI) as well as mobility parameters and payload size to
forecast
the currently achievable data rate Φ(t). For the
opportunistic data transmission, ML-CAT uses a probabilistic
process that computes the transmission probability p(t) based
on the currently predicted data rate and its value range deﬁned
by Φmin and Φmax . The weighting exponent α is used to
deﬁne the preference of high metric values.

(cid:18) Φ(t) − Φmin

Φmax − Φmin

(cid:19)α

Fig. 5.
System model for machine learning-based context-predictive data
transmission with ML-pCAT.

p(t) =

(1)

B. Data Transfer: Machine Learning-based Opportunistic
Transmission

In this case study, we present groundwork for resource-
efﬁcient transmission of vehicular sensor data for optimizing
the coexistence of different resource-consuming cell users. The
general approach is to transmit the acquired data in a context-
aware manner by exploiting knowledge about the properties of
the radio channel. During good channel periods, packet loss is
less probable and the resulting data rate is high, therefore the
limited resources are only occupied for short time periods. For
the opportunistic transmission, acquired sensor data is stored
in a local buffer until the expected transmission efﬁciency is
considered sufﬁcient for the whole buffered data.

With ML-pCAT [11], ML-CAT is extended to integrate to
anticipated future network quality states into the transmission
process. Mobility prediction is applied to forecast the future
vehicle position and a-priori connectivity map information
is exploited to estimate the future network quality based on
crowdsensing data.
Fig. III-B show the resulting mean data rate and power
consumption of ML-CAT and ML-pCAT in a real world
evaluation campsaign using the public cellular network. Data
transmissions are performed from a moving vehicle to a
cloud-based server, whereas the overall driven distance is
more than 2000 km. Further details about the setup and the
parametrization are provided in [32] and [11]. The proposed
ML-CAT scheme is compared to naive periodic data transfer
(transmission interval 30 s) and the SINR-based CAT and

Fig. 6. Results of real world data transmissions for context-aware (CAT-based) and context-predictive (pCAT-based) approaches. Through integration of
machine learning-based data rate prediction both approaches can massively increase the resulting data rate while simultaneously reducing the power consumption
of the mobile UE.

Anticipatory Data TransmissionNetwork InfrastructureMobility PredictionOpportunistic DataTransfer using ML-pCATNetwork ContextConnectivity MapsNetworkQualityIndicatorsMobilityDataLocationDataData Rate PredictionMobilityDataTrainingDataPredictionModelApriori informationMeasured dataVehicle-as-a-sensorApplicationsCell ResourcesMobility ContextTrajectoryPositionVelocitySensor PayloadReference SignalsDerived by UE0100200300400500510150100200300400500-100-90-800100200300400500-10-501002003004005000102030RSRPRSRQCQISINRPeriodicCATML-CATTransmission Scheme68101214161820Mean Data Rate per Drive [MBit/s]60708090100110120130140Mean Uplink Power Consumption [mW]PeriodicCATML-CAT+ 11.35 MBit/s+ 158%- 59.45 mW- 50%PeriodicpCATML-pCATTransmission Scheme6810121416182022Mean Data Rate per Drive [MBit/s]5060708090100110120130140Mean Uplink Power Consumption [mW]PeriodicpCATML-pCAT+ 13.87 MBit/s+ 194%- 63.5 mW- 54%Fig. 7. Methodological process for modeling and optimization of realistic trafﬁc scenarios based on real world trafﬁc data. Road network topology information
is utilized to generate a simulation setup, which is calibrated using sensor data.

pCAT schemes. It can be seen that the integration of machine
learning for network quality assessment
leads to massive
increases in the end-to-end data rate. The proposed approach is
able to implicitly consider complex interdependencies between
the different network quality indicators and the transmitted
data itself. The achieved beneﬁts are even increased by consid-
ering the future vehicle context along the vehicle’s trajectory
with ML-pCAT. Additionally, the average power consumption
of the mobile device is signiﬁcantly reduced. On the one
hand, data transmission are more likely performed at good
channel conditions with a low transmission power and a low
packet loss probability, on the other hand the transmissions
themselves are executed faster due to the higher data rate.
Since the applied transmission power has a dominant impact
on the overall power consumption [33], the device battery is
used in a more efﬁcient way.
The results of the considered case study show that antic-
ipatory communication can serve as a powerful mechanism
to boost the resource-efﬁciency of data transmissions from
the UE side without requiring cost-intense extensions of the
network infrastructure or the spectrum resources.

C. Data Analysis and Data Exploitation: Modeling and Op-
timization of Inner City Vehicular Trafﬁc
In the ﬁnal case study, we present a process for modeling
and optimization of realistic trafﬁc scenarios based on real
world sensor measurements. Although the considered scenario,
which is described in further details in [29],
is focusing
on non-automated trafﬁc, it provides valuable methodological
groundwork for the proposed overall system model as it
involves real world data acquisition, model generation, data
analysis for bottleneck detection and data exploitation for
trafﬁc ﬂow optimization using dynamic vehicle routing.
Fig. III-C shows the system model for the considered
simulation scenario. In the ﬁrst step, a model for the road
network is derived based on real world map knowledge. Real
world data of a video-detection system located around and
within the German city D ¨usseldorf is used to calibrate the

simulation-parameters of the Break-light-CA-model [25] and
the trafﬁc-inﬂow.
For minimizing the global dwell time of the vehicles within
the trafﬁc system, the optimization methods Breakdown Min-
imization Principle (BMP) [34], Wardrops User Equilibrium
(WE) [35], and a newly introduced method, which combines
both approaches, are compared. The BMP aims to minimize
the entropy by maximization of the distance to the criticial
trafﬁc ﬂow for each detected bottleneck. Although this ap-
proach works well for medium to high trafﬁc ﬂows, it causes
larger travel times than required for low trafﬁc ﬂow scenarios,
resulting in an increased global travel time. The combined
approach is able to avoid these situations through integrating
the travel times within the model. In the considered scenario,
BMP is able to reduce the average travel time by 23 % and
the combined model further achieves a reduction by 10 %.
The results show that dynamic routing methods can success-
fully utilized for reducing the overall dwell time of vehicles
within the trafﬁc system. For the hybrid vehicular trafﬁc, the
capabilities for propagating routing information to individual
vehicles are limited and depend on the availability of com-
munication technology. Therefore, it needs to be investigated
how the established models perform if only a fraction of the
vehicles implements the optimization principles.

IV. CONC LU S ION

In this paper, we presented a system-of-systems approach
for modeling, analysis and optimization of hybrid vehicular
trafﬁc system with a focus on data-driven trafﬁc analysis. On
the long way towards fully-autonomous trafﬁc, the coexistence
of systems with heterogeneous automation levels leads to
novel challenges for trafﬁc management systems, which need
to be addressed by new methods of data acquisition, data trans-
fer, data analysis and data exploitation. Therefore, proposed
system-of-systems model relies on close interdisciplinary work
of trafﬁc physics, data science and communication engineer-
ing. Within multiple case studies, we presented groundwork
for all main systems aspects and illustrated ways of using

Trafﬁc Model GenerationModel CalibrationTra c Flow Optimization010002000300006121824Time of dayCars per h5001000150020002500024681012141618202224Simulationtime [h]Traveltime [Timesteps]MethodBMPCombinationStatic WECreation of a simulation network based on a real world scenario and deﬁnition of behavior rules for the mobile agents.Integration of real world trafﬁc ﬂow data based on video detection of moving vehicles.Detection of trafﬁc bottlenecks and trafﬁc ﬂow adjustmentthrough dynamic routing.the existing road and network infrastructure in more efﬁcient
ways. In future work, we will continue to transfer the different
individual components into the proposed overall system model.
For analysis and optimization, simulation models based on
measured system properties will be derived. After the simula-
tive optimization phase, adjustments will be fed back into the
real world systems.

ACKNOW L EDGM ENT
Part of the work on this paper has been supported by Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (DFG) within the Collaborative Research Center SFB 876
“Providing Information by Resource-Constrained Analysis”, project B4.

R E F ER ENC E S

[1] W. Brenner and A. Herrmann, An overview of
technology, beneﬁts
and impact of automated and autonomous driving on the automotive
industry.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2018, pp.
427–442.
[2] C. T. Calafate, K. Cicenia, O. Alvear, J. C. Cano, and P. Manzoni,
“Estimating rainfall intensity by using vehicles as sensors,” in 2017
Wireless Days, March 2017, pp. 21–26.
[3] SAE International, “Taxonomy and deﬁnitions for terms related to on-
road motor vehicle automated driving systems (Standard No. J3016),”
Tech. Rep., 2014.
[4] L. Ye and T. Yamamoto, “Modeling connected and autonomous vehicles
in heterogeneous trafﬁc ﬂow,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications, vol. 490, pp. 269 – 277, 2018.
[5] M. Zhou, X. Qu, and S. Jin, “On the impact of cooperative autonomous
vehicles in improving freeway merging: A modiﬁed intelligent driver
model-based approach,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1422–1428, June 2017.
[6] C. Chen, T. H. Luan, X. Guan, N. Lu, and Y. Liu, “Connected vehicular
transportation: Data analytics and trafﬁc-dependent networking,” IEEE
Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 42–54, Sept 2017.
[7] X. Wang, X. Zheng, Q. Zhang, T. Wang, and D. Shen, “Crowdsourcing
in ITS: The state of the work and the networking,” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1596–1605,
June 2016.
[8] S. Wang, S. Kodagoda, L. Shi, and H. Wang, “Road-terrain classiﬁcation
for land vehicles: Employing an acceleration-based approach,” IEEE
Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 34–41, Sept 2017.
[9] J. Guerrero-Ib ´a ˜nez, S. Zeadally, and J. Contreras-Castillo, “Sensor
technologies for intelligent transportation systems,” Sensors, vol. 18,
no. 4, 2018.
[10] N. Bui, M. Cesana, S. A. Hosseini, Q. Liao, I. Malanchini, and
J. Widmer, “A survey of anticipatory mobile networking: Context-based
classiﬁcation, prediction methodologies, and optimization techniques,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2017.
[11] B. Sliwa, T. Liebig, R. Falkenberg, J. Pillmann, and C. Wietfeld,
“Machine learning based context-predictive car-to-cloud communication
using multi-layer connectivity maps for upcoming 5G networks,” in 2018
IEEE 88th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), Chicago, USA,
Aug 2018.
[12] B. Sliwa, D. Behnke, C. Ide, and C. Wietfeld, “B.A.T.Mobile: Leverag-
ing mobility control knowledge for efﬁcient routing in mobile robotic
networks,” in IEEE GLOBECOM 2016 Workshop on Wireless Network-
ing, Control and Positioning of Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles (Wi-
UAV), Washington D.C., USA, Dec 2016.
[13] E. R. Cavalcanti, J. A. R. de Souza, M. A. Spohn, R. C. d. M. Gomes,
and A. F. B. F. d. Costa, “VANETs’ research over the past decade:
Overview, credibility, and trends,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev.,
vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 31–39, May 2018.
[14] K. Liu, J. K. Ng, J. Wang, V. C. S. Lee, W. Wu, and S. H. Son,
“Network-coding-assisted data dissemination via cooperative vehicle-to-
vehicle/-infrastructure communications,” IEEE Transactions on Intelli-
gent Transportation Systems, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1509–1520, June 2016.
[15] K. Nagel and M. Schreckenberg, “A cellular automaton model for
freeway trafﬁc,” Journal de physique I, vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 2221–2229,
1992.

[16] L. Habel, A. Molina, T. Zaksek, K. Kersting, and M. Schreckenberg,
“Trafﬁc simulations with empirical data: How to replace missing trafﬁc
ﬂows?” in Trafﬁc and Granular Flow ’15, V. L. Knoop and W. Daamen,
Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 491–498.
[17] X. Ma, Z. Dai, Z. He, J. Ma, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Learning
trafﬁc as images: A deep convolutional neural network for large-scale
transportation network speed prediction,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 4, p. 818,
2017.
[18] F. Zhao and N. Park, “Using geographically weighted regression mod-
els to estimate annual average daily trafﬁc,” Transportation Research
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 1879, pp.
99–107, 2004.
[19] X. Gong and F. Wang, “Three improvements on KNN-NPR for trafﬁc
ﬂow forecasting,” in Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2002. Proceed-
ings. The IEEE 5th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2002, pp.
736–740.
[20] W. H. Lam, Y. Tang, and M.-L. Tam, “Comparison of two non-
parametric models for daily trafﬁc forecasting in hong kong,” Journal
of Forecasting, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 173–192, 2006.
[21] B. F. Selby, “Spatial prediction of AADT in unmeasured locations
by universal kriging and microsimulation of vehicle holdings and car-
market pricing dynamics,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Texas,
Austin, May 2011.
[22] B. Selby and K. Kockelman, “Spatial prediction of AADT in unmea-
sured locations by universal kriging,” Tech. Rep., 2011.
[23] T. Liebig, Z. Xu, and M. May, “Incorporating mobility patterns in
pedestrian quantity estimation and sensor placement,” in Citizen in
Sensor Networks, 2013, pp. 67–80.
[24] A. Artikis, M. Weidlich, F. Schnitzler, I. Boutsis, T. Liebig, N. Pi-
atkowski, C. Bockermann, K. Morik, V. Kalogeraki, J. Marecek, A. Gal,
S. Mannor, D. Gunopulos, and D. Kinane, “Heterogeneous stream pro-
cessing and crowdsourcing for urban trafﬁc management,” in Proc. 17th
International Conference on Extending Database Technology (EDBT),
Athens, Greece, March 24-28, 2014. OpenProceedings.org, 2014, pp.
712–723.
[25] W. Knospe, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider, and M. Schreckenberg,
“Towards a realistic microscopic description of highway trafﬁc,” Journal
of Physics A: Mathematical and General, vol. 33, no. 48, p. L477, 2000.
[26] C. Sommer, R. German, and F. Dressler, “Bidirectionally coupled
network and road trafﬁc simulation for improved IVC analysis,” IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 3–15, Jan 2011.
[27] B. Sliwa, J. Pillmann, F. Eckermann, L. Habel, M. Schreckenberg,
and C. Wietfeld, “Lightweight joint simulation of vehicular mobility
and communication with LIMoSim,” in IEEE Vehicular Networking
Conference (VNC), Torino, Italy, Nov 2017.
[28] T. Liebig, N. Piatkowski, C. Bockermann, and K. Morik, “Dynamic route
planning with real-time trafﬁc predictions,” Inf. Syst., vol. 64, no. C, pp.
258–265, Mar 2017.
[29] T. Vranken, B. Sliwa, C. Wietfeld, and M. Schreckenberg, “Performance
comparison of dynamic vehicle routing methods for minimizing the
global dwell
time in upcoming smart cities,” in 2018 IEEE 88th
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), Chicago, USA, Aug 2018.
[30] B. Sliwa, N. Piatkowski, M. Haferkamp, D. Dorn, and C. Wietfeld,
“Leveraging the channel as a sensor: Real-time vehicle classiﬁcation
using multidimensional radio-ﬁngerprinting,” in 2018 IEEE 21st Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), Maui,
Hawaii, USA, Nov 2018.
[31] C. Ide, B. Dusza, and C. Wietfeld, “Client-based control of the inter-
dependence between LTE MTC and human data trafﬁc in vehicular
environments,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 64,
no. 5, pp. 1856–1871, May 2015.
[32] B. Sliwa, T. Liebig, R. Falkenberg, J. Pillmann, and C. Wietfeld,
“Efﬁcient machine-type communication using multi-metric context-
awareness for cars used as mobile sensors in upcoming 5G networks,” in
2018 IEEE 87th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Spring), Porto,
Portugal, Jun 2018, Best Student Paper Award.
[33] R. Falkenberg, B. Sliwa, N. Piatkowski, and C. Wietfeld, “Machine
learning based uplink transmission power prediction for LTE and up-
coming 5G networks using passive downlink indicators,” in 2018 IEEE
88th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), Chicago, USA, Aug
2018.
[34] B. S. Kerner, “Optimum principle for a vehicular trafﬁc network:
Minimum probability of congestion,” J. Phys. A: Math. Theor., vol. 44,
092001, 2011.

[35] J. Wardrop, “Some theoretical aspects of road trafﬁc research,” in
Proceedings of the Institute of Civil Engineers, vol. I, no. 1, 1952, pp.
325–378.

