Published in: 2019 IEEE 89th IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Spring)
DOI: 10.1109/VTCSpring.2019.8746361

Performance Evaluation and Optimization of
B.A.T.M.A.N. V Routing for Aerial and
Ground-based Mobile Ad-hoc Networks

Benjamin Sliwa, Stefan Falten and Christian Wietfeld

Communication Networks Institute, TU Dortmund University, 44227 Dortmund, Germany
e-mail: {Benjamin.Sliwa, Stefan.Falten, Christian.Wietfeld}@tu-dortmund.de

9
1
0
2

v
o

N

1
2

]
I

N

.

s

c

[

2
v
8
9
2
2
0

.

1
0
9
1

:

v

i

X

r

a

Abstract—The provision of reliable and efﬁcient end-to-
end communication within ground- and air-based mobile mesh
networks is a major challenge for routing protocols due to the
mobility-related dynamics of the channel properties and the
resulting mesh network topology. In this paper, we evaluate
the performance of the novel Better Approach To Mobile Ad-
hoc Networking (B.A.T.M.A.N.) V routing protocol for vehicular
mesh networks and propose a mobility-predictive extension
that explicitly addresses highly dynamic communication net-
works. In order to enable large-scale simulative analysis, we
present an open source simulation model, which is validated by
ﬁeld experiments. Within a comprehensive evaluation campaign
in Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
(UAV) scenarios, it is shown that the predictive B.A.T.M.A.N.
V-based approach is signiﬁcantly better suited for maintaining
reliable connectivity within highly mobile mesh networks than
established routing protocols.

• Presentation of a novel open source simulation model of

B.A.T.M.A.N. V for Objective Modular Network Testbed
in C++ (OMNeT++) [6] and its INET/ INETMANET
framework, which is close to the Linux kernel imple-
mentation of the protocol.
• Simulation model validation using ﬁeld measurements
and empirical channel modeling in Sec. V.
• Optimization and extension of B.A.T.M.A.N. V for high
mobility scenarios using mobility prediction in Sec. III.
• Performance comparison of B.A.T.M.A.N. V and the
proposed experimental extensions with established pro-
tocols in aerial and ground-based simulation scenarios in
Sec. VI.
• All raw results are provided in an open access way.

I . IN TRODUC T ION

I I . R E LATED WORK

The usage of multi-hop communication within mesh-based
Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANETs) enables signiﬁcant range
extensions as well as path redundancy, which is exploited in
vehicular platooning, remote sensing of disaster areas using
UAVs and ad-hoc network provisioning (c.f. Fig. 1). Due to
the potentially high relative mobility of the different nodes and
the short lifetime of routing paths, which results in a highly
dynamic network topology, routing is immanently challenging
in these networks.
A promising solution approach that explicitly addresses
these challenges, is the usage of anticipatory communication
[1], [2], which aims to utilize the existing communication
network in a more efﬁcient way by an increased situation-
awareness. Cross-layer principles allow the integration of the
mobility characteristics of the vehicles themselves into the
routing decisions.
In this paper, we extend previous work on mobility-aware
vehicular mesh routing [3] based on the B.A.T.M.A.N. routing
protocol [4] in order to leverage new features of the ﬁfth
protocol version. Unlike most established routing protocols,
which handle routing on the network layer, B.A.T.M.A.N.
operates on the Medium Access Control (MAC) layer since
version IV [5]. Moreover, version V introduces major changes
and novelties in the routing behavior and its metrics.
In
the remainder of this paper, the following contributions to
anticipatory mesh networking are provided:

In this section, we discuss current approaches for vehicu-
lar mesh routing and provide information about the general
properties of the considered B.A.T.M.A.N. protocol.

A. Overview of Current Vehicular Mesh Routing Approaches
A detailed overview about current Vehicular Ad-hoc Net-
work (VANET)– which form a subclass of MANETs– trends
and research topics based on literature analysis is provided by
[7]. While routing is pointed out as one of the major VANET
research topics, it is stated that traditional (topology-based)
routing protocols mostly cannot satisfy the requirements of
highly mobile vehicular scenarios. Similarly, the authors of
[8] emphasize the need for cross-layer design techniques in
order to increase the situation-awareness for routing in mobile
networks. Geo-based approaches such as Greedy Perimeter
Stateless Routing (GPSR) [9] exploit positioning information
for routing decisions, which has been demonstrated to work
efﬁciently in vehicular networks. Consequently, predictive
extensions have been proposed, which go another step further
by integrating locations forecasts into the routing process for
estimating link stability times [10], [11]. Those approaches are
usually implemented as an extension to existing protocols –
e.g., based on Ad hoc On-demand Distance Vector (AODV)
[12] in [13] and GPSR-based in [14]. However, although
existing solutions achieve signiﬁcant
improvements in the
resulting transmission efﬁciency, the approaches are mostly

c(cid:13) 2019 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses,
including reprinting/republishing this material for adver tising or promotional purposes, collecting new collected works
for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

 
 
 
 
 
 
generic and rely on naive predictions, e.g., extrapolations
based on position, direction and velocity.
Although in the past the research in vehicular and aerial
mesh networks has mostly been carried out with an isolated
view on the intended usecase, recent works emphasize their
similarities [15] and advocate for a joint consideration of
these vehicle types within upcoming Intelligent Transportation
System (ITS) scenarios, e.g., near-ﬁeld delivery and ad-hoc
network provisioning and sensing at road incidents by UAVs.

B. General Properties of the B.A.T.M.A.N. Routing Protocol
B.A.T.M.A.N. [12] has been proposed by the Freifunk com-
munity after the application of Optimized Link State Routing
(OLSR) [16] did not fulﬁll the performance requirements of
large-scale mesh deployments. Although B.A.T.M.A.N. is a
proactive protocol and shows a similar performance as other
established protocols, it has some unique properties that arise
from its bio-inspired nature, which implement the idea of
stigmergy.
• B.A.T.M.A.N. strictly follows a decentralized routing
approach: Instead of requiring complete knowledge about
the network topology, only information about the suit-
ability of the direct neighbors for reaching a deﬁned
destination is maintained,
the network in between is
considered a black box. As information is redundantly
received from all other nodes of the network – which are
referred to as originators – via multiple paths through the
immediate neighboring nodes, it is highly robust against
packet loss.
• The
periodically
transmitted Originator Messages
(OGMs), which contain information about the reverse
path quality, are propagated through the whole network.
The metric calculation and message handling can easily
be exchanged by another method, making it a promising
research platform for optimization and development of
new link quality assessment methods.

Fig. 1. Example applications for aerial and vehicular mesh networks.

Fig. 2. Architecture model and message ﬂow for B.A.T.M.A.N. V routing.

• Since multiple paths are maintained for each destination,
multi-path communication can be integrated for load
balancing [17].
• In contrast to other protocols, which are often only eval-
uated in simulators, the development of B.A.T.M.A.N. V
is driven by a practical usecase intention and implemen-
tations are available for Linux-based operating systems.

I I I . S IMU LAT ION -BA SED SY ST EM MODE L

In this section, the simulation model and its extensions for
highly mobile scenarios are presented.
An illustration of the overall architecture model and the
message ﬂow is shown in Fig. 2. As an entry point for all
exchanged packets, the mesh interface bat0 is used to abstract
the underlying mesh topology of the network, acting as a
virtual network switch. All routing messages are encapsulated
in raw Ethernet frames. The MAC layer approach allows the
implementation of the routing mechanism as a linux kernel
module, which – in contrast to network layer routing – avoids
the necessity for packet exchange between userspace and ker-
nelspace, reducing computing effort and energy consumption.
Although the INETMANET framework of OMNeT++ pro-
vides ManetRoutingBase.ned as a common abstraction
for MANET protocols, it only considers network layer routing.
Therefore, the simulation model is based on a novel logical
host module Batman5Router.ned, which links the inter-
faces of the different logical layers.
The routing protocol uses different packet types to deter-
mine the reverse path metric to the originators within the net-
work, which is further explained in the following paragraphs.

A. Link Quality Assessment
Due to the decentralized approach of B.A.T.M.A.N. V, all
decision processes are based on link-level knowledge, which
is obtained by periodical exchange of Echo Location Protocol
(ELP) messages. In regular protocol implementation, the latter
are used to estimate the throughput to the direct neighbors.
Additionally, ELP probing triggers the transmission of two
unicast ELP messages to each forwarder within the deﬁned

Aerial Mesh NetworkVehicular Mesh NetworkRemote MissionControl CenterExploring UAV SwarmMesh GatewayIncidentAreaMAC LayerB.A.T.M.A.N.AdvNetwork LayerTransport LayerPhysical LayerRoutingOGMv2 TransferPath Quality- Plausibility check- Metric update- Route update- RebroadcastELPTransferLink Quality-One-hop throughputmeasurement- Exponentially weightedmoving averagePacket ForwardingOGM - Originator MessageELP- Echo Location Protocolbat0:Virtualmesh interfaceNetworkinterfaceBatman5Routing.nedMetric updatePacketForwarder LookupTransmissionELP interval in order to artiﬁcially generate trafﬁc for the
throughput estimation. While this procedure is mandatory in
the linux kernel implementation, it is optional in the simulation
model and can be conﬁgured to use variable packet sizes,
which are further evaluated in Sec. VI. As an alternative to
the throughput metric, a hopcount-based approach, which uses
hop penalties, can be applied. After node N has determined
new immediate link metric value ΦN
F to forwarder F , the ﬁnal
value is calculated based on the link quality history using
Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (EWMA).

B. Routing Process and Metrics
Each node N maintains a link metric ΦN
F for each of its
1-hop neighbors, based on knowledge obtained from ELP
message exchange. Routing decisions are based on the end-to-
end path metric towards each originator, which is derived from
the metrics of the reverse path obtained from the OGMs. Upon
creation of an OGM, each originator initializes the reverse
path score as the uint32 maximum 232 − 1 and announces it
with the message. The intermediate nodes update the contained
value based on their local knowledge about the link quality
to the last forwarder. In the proposed simulation model, the
metric calculation is formulated in an abstract way in order to
emphasize its platform character, which enables the integration
of further metrics in the future. As all logical calculations are
performed in the continuous domain in the range [0, 1], the
uint32 values are transformed into this value range for the
processing step and back before the packet forwarding.
Upon reception of an OGM of node D via a forwarder F ,
node N computes the reverse path metric ΨN
D|F as

ΨN
D|F = Θ( ˆΨD , ΦN
F )

(1)

by applying an operator Θ to the received reverse path metric
ˆΨD and the link metric ΦN
F to the forwarder. A summary of
the considered metrics for the different B.A.T.M.A.N. protocol
versions and the proposed extensions is given in Tab. I.

E S TAB L I SH ED AND EX P ER IM EN TAL ROUT ING M E TR IC S FOR THE
D I FFEREN T B .A .T.M .A .N . V ER S ION S

TABLE I

Version Metric

III

IV
V
V
V
V

Average number of received OGMs within a deﬁned
interval
Determination of the Transmission Quality (TQ)
Throughput estimation based on ELP transfer
Hop count
Distance-based forwarding using position information
Mobility prediction

1) Distance-based Forwarding: As discussed in II-A, the
usage of geo-information is a promising approach for routing
in vehicular networks. Therefore, the basic B.A.T.M.A.N. V
protocol is extended for geo-based decision making through
a novel routing metric, which is based on position announce-
ments within the ELP messages.

With dN
F (t) being the distance from node N to node F
and dmax being an estimation for the transmission range, the
proposed metric update procedure is handled as

D|F (t) = ˆΨD −
ΨN

(2)

(cid:18) dN
F (t)

(cid:19)α

dmax

with α as a weighting exponent.
2) Mobility-predictive Forwarding: In order to achieve a
higher level of awareness about the future network topology,
the geo-based forwarding scheme is extended by a predictive
component. Upon transmission of an ELP message, each node
predicts its own future position based on trajectory knowledge
and announces it within the message.
In the following, it is assumed that each vehicle is able to
determine an estimation of its near future trajectory. For com-
pleteness, we refer to the analysis in [18], where the accuracy
of different mobility prediction approaches is compared in real
world vehicular scenarios. The future position ˜P(t + τ ) is then
obtained by virtually moving the vehicle along the path of its
trajectory for the duration of τ , which is further described in
[18]. The mobility-predictive metric is then calculated as

(cid:34)(cid:18) dN

F (t)

dmax

(cid:32) ˜dN
F (t + τ )

(cid:33)α(cid:35)

(cid:19)α

,

dmax

D|F (t) = ˆΨD − max
ΨN

(3)

with τ being the desired prediction lookahead and ˜dN
being the anticipated distance between N and F .

F (t + τ )

IV. M ETHODO LOGY

In this section, the setups for the simulative evaluation and
the experimental validation are presented.

A. Evaluation Scenario
The simulation model
is based on OMNeT++ and the
INET/INETMANET framework and is provided in an open
source way at [19] alongside with the raw results of the
performed evaluations. For the ﬁeld test validation, common
of-the-shelf embedded computers are used that run a linux-
based operating system and execute the B.A.T.M.A.N. V
(version 2018.0) routing mechanism.
The default parameters for the different scenarios and rout-
ing protocols are summarized in Tab. II. For the mobility-
predictive metric, dmax is calculated as the maximum distance
that satisﬁes the receiver sensitivity based on the channel
model. The Friis model is used for rural environments and
the Nakagami model is used to model urban scenarios. The
prediction lookahead is chosen based on the analysis of [3].
For the evaluations,
the performance of a multi-hop User
Datagram Protocol (UDP) data Constant Bitrate (CBR) stream
is analyzed.

B. Mobility Models
For the simulative performance evaluation, a mixture of
generic and vehicle-speciﬁc mobility models is applied. The
initial performance evaluation and parameter optimization is
performed using a Random Waypoint model
in order to
allow comparisons with other research works, however it is

TABLE II

D E FAU LT S IMU LAT ION PARAM E TER S

Parameter

Value

MAC
Channel model: Rural / Urban
Path loss exponent η
Receiver sensitivity
Transmission power
Carrier frequency
Number of mesh nodes
Stream data rate
Simulation duration per run
Simulation runs per setting
Playground size: Generic scenario
Playground size: UAV scenario
Playground size: Vehicular scenario
B.A.T.M.A.N. version
OMNeT++/ INET version
OGM interval
ELP interval
Weighting exponent α: Rural / Urban
Prediction lookahead τ : Rural / Urban

IEEE 802.11g
{Friis, Nakagami (m=2)}
2.65
-83 dBm
{10, 20} dBm
2.4 GHz
10
10 MBit/s
300 s
25
600 m x 600 m x 10 m
500 m x 500 m x 250 m
1500 m x 1000 m x 10 m
2018.0
5.2.1 / 3.6.3
0.33 s
0.2 s
{3, 4} s

{1, 2}

Fig. 4. Overview of the ﬁeld test scenario and its representation within the
OMNeT++ simulator for the validation.

future.

V. VA L IDAT ION

In this
section,
the derived simulation model
for
B.A.T.M.A.N. V is validated using ﬁeld measurements in
controlled scenarios using the default routing metric. Within
the real world measurements, a mobile vehicle transmits UDP
stream data with a trafﬁc load of 10 MBit/s to a static
server node using the mesh network infrastructure. iperf
is
used for trafﬁc generation and Key Performance Indicator
(KPI) measurement. The same scenario is modeled within a
simulation setup.
Fig. 4 shows a map of the real world evaluation scenario
as well as its representation within the OMNeT++ simulator.
All B.A.T.M.A.N. V nodes are mounted on a tripod at 1.5 m
height. For the One-hop scenario, the server is placed centrally
between the location markers 1 and 2. Two-hop uses location 2
for the server and location 1 for a single relay node. Multi-hop
applies the topology illustrated for the OMNeT++ scenario as
shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 5 shows the measured channel properties
and the Friis and Two Ray channel models for comparison. It
can be seen that the mean attenuation behavior above 70 m
can be approximated by the Friis model with a path loss
exponent η of 2.65. The Two Ray model does not ﬁt well
in the considered small-scale scenario.
In order to achieve a high congruency of the real world
and the simulation scenario, an empirical channel model is
created based on the ﬁeld measurements and used for the
following validation. The resulting data rate and delay of the
measurement campaign and its simulation representation is
shown in Fig. 6. The results substantiate the outcome of the
channel behavior analysis. In the considered small-scale range,

Fig. 3. Map of the campus area for the vehicular evaluation scenario. (Map
data: c(cid:13)OpenStreetMap contributors, CC BY-SA.)

assumed that vehicles are aware of their future trajectory.
For the vehicular scenario, a network provisioning scenario
using gateway vehicles is modeled using Lightweight ICT-
centric Mobility Simulation (LIMoSim) [20]. 30 cars move
around the campus area of the TU Dortmund University, which
is illustrated in Fig. 3. One randomly selected vehicle aims
to establish a stream data connection to a network gateway
vehicle using the mesh for packet forwarding.
For the evaluation of the applicability of the proposed
mobility-predictive routing protocol, for low-altitude UAV
applications, the Distributed Dispersion Detection (DDD) [21]
algorithm applied, which is intended for agent-based plume
exploration in hazardous environments. The mesh communi-
cation is used to stream video data to a remote mission control
center. Here, a trace-based mobility modeling approach is
applied based on traces of the MATLAB-based UAV simulation
framework of [21]. The UAVs make use of controlled mobility,
thus each UAV is aware of its desired trajectory in the near

car[0]OMNeT++Real Worldrelay[0]server[0]relay[1]relay[2]Mesh Node0123the Two Ray model is mostly in the constructive interference
region with an unrealistic high data rate, which is more than
twice as high as the measurement, therefore it is not considered
further. The Nakagami model provides a close approximation
of the real world behavior of the data rate but fails to model
the delay behavior with a sufﬁcient accuracy. It can been seen
that the best match for both indicators is achieved by the
empirical channel model that is based on the measured channel
characteristics. In conclusion, the proposed simulation model
for B.A.T.M.A.N. V and its real world implementation show
similar average characteristics and results.

V I . S IMU LAT IV E P ER FORMANC E EVA LUAT ION

In this section, B.A.T.M.A.N. V and its proposed extensions
are evaluated in different scenarios and compared with the
established routing protocols AODV [12], OLSR [16], and
B.A.T.M.A.N. III [4]. All errorbars show the 0.95-conﬁdence
interval of the mean value. At ﬁrst, the parametrization of
B.A.T.M.A.N. V is optimized for the mobile scenario based
on random waypoint mobility. Afterwards, the performance of
the protocol is evaluated in two reference scenarios focusing
on vehicular and UAV mobility.
A. Optimization for Highly Mobile Scenarios
B.A.T.M.A.N. V introduces ELP probing, which is intended
to provide the throughput metric with further trafﬁc for the
link quality assessment. Therefore, the effects of the additional
messages are evaluated. Fig. 7 shows the impact of ELP
probing on the resulting data rate for different ELP packet
sizes. It can be seen that the amount of additional messages
has a negative impact on the routing performance in the mobile
scenario due to the increased amount of collisions. Therefore,
ELP probing is disabled for the following evaluations.
A comparison of the native throughput metric with the pro-
posed mobility-aware extensions is shown in Fig. 8. Although
both proposals outperform the native approach, the general
Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) in the rural scenario is very high,
thus limiting the optimization potential. In the urban scenario,
the throughput-based approach suffers from paket loss. Here,
the mobility-aware approaches are able to achieve signiﬁcant
beneﬁts, with the predictive approach increasing the PDR by
23 %. Therefore, only the proposed predictive B.A.T.M.A.N.
V metric will be considered in the further evaluations.

Fig. 5. Empirically measured channel properties and channel model approx-
imation.

Fig. 9 shows a scalability analysis with varied vehicle
speed, trafﬁc load and number of streams. In general, the
extended B.A.T.M.A.N. V and reactive AODV achieve sig-
niﬁcantly higher PDR values than OLSR and B.A.T.M.A.N.
III. Due to its mobility-related metric, the proposed extended
B.A.T.M.A.N. V has a higher dependency to the velocity
than the topology-based protocols, resulting in a steeper PDR
decrease with increased speed. With the trafﬁc load of the
single stream being varied, the PDR is only slightly reduced
for all considered protocols. Furthermore, the behavior of the
protocol for a varied number of 2 MBit/s streams with ran-
dom source-destination pairs is analyzed. Here, the extended
B.A.T.M.A.N. V behaves slightly better than AODV. Up to
three parallel streams, AODV beneﬁts from the increased
trafﬁc on multiple end-to-end paths. Although AODV is a
reactive protocol, all intermediate nodes of an active path
maintain the reverse path quality for a deﬁned time period.
Therefore, the presence of multiple active paths increases the
probability that the nodes are able to switch the routing path
within a changed network topology without requiring a route
request phase. For a higher number of active streams, the
increasing loss probability for routing messages signiﬁcantly
decreases the routing performance for all considered protocols.

B. UAV Evaluation Scenario

Fig. 10 shows the resulting PDR and delay values for
the considered protocols in the UAV-based plume exploration
scenario using DDD. As the mobility algorithm itself is
connectivity-aware, it aims to maintain the swarm coherence
by adjusting the mobility behavior of the UAVs, which results
in a generally high PDR level. Although the mean PDR value
of the proposed approach is only slightly better than the result
of OLSR and B.A.T.M.A.N. III, the occurrence of lower PDR
values is signiﬁcantly reduced. While all proactive protocols
achieve a similar delay, the latter is signiﬁcantly higher for
AODV due to its on-demand approach.

C. Vehicular Evaluation Scenario

Fig. 11 shows the resulting PDR and delay values for the
considered protocols. In contrast to the previously analyzed
UAV scenario,
the vehicular scenario is more challenging
for the routing protocols, since the larger network causes
a higher number of potential routing paths from source to
destination. Moreover, the physical dimensions of the scenario
itself are larger and since the mobility characteristics of the
vehicles are connectivity-unaware, connectivity is not always
guaranteed. Therefore, the general PDR level is lower than
in the UAV scenario. The highest PDR is achieved by the
proposed predictive B.A.T.M.A.N. V, which exploits the high
predictability of road-based vehicular mobility. Although the
delay for AODV is on average more than ﬁve times larger
than for the proactive protocols, all protocols fulﬁll the delay
ETSI requirements for safety-related vehicular communication
in the considered scenario [22].

020406080100120140160180200Distance [m]-100-80-60-40-20RSSI [dBm]Simulated receiver sensitivityMeasurementFriis withTwo RayFig. 6. Model validation: Comparison of measurements for data rate and delay with simulation results using different channel models.

narios. In addition, our proposed novel routing metrics, which
exploit distance-awareness and mobility prediction, showed a
signiﬁcantly better performance than the throughput estimation
metric of B.A.T.M.A.N. V. In different case-studies for aerial
and ground-based mobile ad-hoc networks, it was shown that
the extended protocol is well-suited for maintaining connec-
tivity within vehicular and UAV-based mesh networks and
outperforms established topology-based routing approaches.
In future work, we will exploit the proposed open source
simulation model as a platform for optimizing vehicular mesh
routing. A promising research topic is the determination of
routing metrics based on reinforcement learning. Additionally,
we will analyze the performance of using B.A.T.M.A.N. V in
scenarios with heterogeneous communication technologies.

ACKNOW LEDGM ENT

Part of the work on this paper has been supported by Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (DFG) within the Collaborative Research Center SFB 876
“Providing Information by Resource-Constrained Analysis”, project B4.

R E F ER ENC E S

[1] N. Bui, M. Cesana, S. A. Hosseini, Q. Liao, I. Malanchini, and
J. Widmer, “A survey of anticipatory mobile networking: Context-based
classiﬁcation, prediction methodologies, and optimization techniques,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2017.
[2] B. Sliwa, T. Liebig, R. Falkenberg, J. Pillmann, and C. Wietfeld,
“Efﬁcient machine-type communication using multi-metric context-
awareness for cars used as mobile sensors in upcoming 5G networks,” in
2018 IEEE 87th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Spring), Porto,
Portugal, Jun 2018, Best Student Paper Award.
[3] B. Sliwa, D. Behnke, C. Ide, and C. Wietfeld, “B.A.T.Mobile: Leverag-
ing mobility control knowledge for efﬁcient routing in mobile robotic
networks,” in IEEE GLOBECOM 2016 Workshop on Wireless Network-
ing, Control and Positioning of Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles (Wi-
UAV), Washington D.C., USA, Dec 2016.
[4] D. Johnson, N. Ntlatlapa, and C. Aichele, “A simple pragmatic approach
to mesh routing using batman,” in In 2nd IFIP International Symposium
on Wireless Communications and Information Technology in Developing
Countries, Pretoria, South Africa, 2008.
[5] T. Hardes, F. Dressler, and C. Sommer, “Simulating a city-scale com-
munity network: From models to ﬁrst improvements for Freifunk,” in
2017 International Conference on Networked Systems (NetSys), March
2017, pp. 1–7.
[6] A. Varga and R. Hornig, “An overview of the OMNeT++ simulation
environment,” in Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on
Simulation Tools and Techniques for Communications, Networks and
Systems & Workshops, ser. Simutools ’08.
ICST, Brussels, Belgium,
Belgium: ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and
Telecommunications Engineering), 2008, pp. 60:1–60:10.

Fig. 7.
Impact of ELP probing on the resulting data rate for different ELP
packet sizes.

Fig. 8.
Comparison of the native Throughput metric with the proposed
Distance and Prediction methods for the rural and the urban evaluation
scenario.

V I I . CONC LU S ION

In this paper, we presented an analysis and optimization of
the novel MAC layer routing protocol B.A.T.M.A.N. V for ve-
hicular scenarios. In order to allow the simulative analysis, an
open source simulation model was derived based on the Linux
kernel implementation and validated using ﬁeld measurements.
Within comprehensive simulation studies, it was shown that
some of the new features of B.A.T.M.A.N. V (e.g., ELP
probing) decrease the routing efﬁciency in highly mobile sce-

One-hopTwo-hopMulti-hopScenario246810Data Rate [MBit/s]MeasurementFriisEmpiricalChannel ModelTwo RayNakagamiOne-hopTwo-hopMulti-hopScenario0102030Delay [ms]0200400600800100012001400ELPPacket Size [Byte]0.70.750.80.850.90.95Packet Delivery RatioELPProbingDisabledThroughputDistancePredictiveThroughputDistancePredictivePath Metric0.50.60.70.80.91Packet Delivery RatioRuralUrban+ 23.9 %+ 3.2 %Fig. 9. Scalability analysis: Comparison of the resulting PDR with respect to vehicle speed, trafﬁc load and number of streams for the proposed mobility-
predictive B.A.T.M.A.N. V and different established protocols (Rural channel).

[7] E. R. Cavalcanti, J. A. R. de Souza, M. A. Spohn, R. C. d. M. Gomes,
and A. F. B. F. d. Costa, “VANETs’ research over the past decade:
Overview, credibility, and trends,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev.,
vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 31–39, May 2018.
[8] A. Awang, K. Husain, N. Kamel, and S. A¨ıssa, “Routing in vehicular
ad-hoc networks: A survey on single- and cross-layer design techniques,
and perspectives,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 9497–9517, 2017.
[9] B. Karp and H. T. Kung, “GPSR: Greedy perimeter stateless routing
for wireless networks,” in Proceedings of the 6th Annual International
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, ser. MobiCom ’00.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2000, pp. 243–254.
[10] G. Singal, V. Laxmi, M. S. Gaur, and V. Rao, “Moralism: Mobility pre-
diction with link stability based multicast routing protocol in MANETs,”
Wireless Networks, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 663–679, Apr 2017.
[11] H. Yang, M. Yu, and X. Zeng, “Link available time prediction based
GPSR for vehicular ad hoc networks,” in 2017 IEEE 14th International
Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control (ICNSC), May 2017,
pp. 293–298.
[12] C. E. Perkins and E. M. Royer, “Ad-hoc on-demand distance vector
routing,” in Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 1999. Pro-
ceedings. WMCSA ’99. Second IEEE Workshop on, Feb 1999, pp. 90–
100.
[13] X. Hu, J. Wang, and C. Wang, “Link stability prediction and its appli-
cation to routing in mobile ad hoc networks,” in 2009 2nd International
Conference on Power Electronics and Intelligent Transportation System
(PEITS), vol. 1, Dec 2009, pp. 141–144.
[14] H. Huang and S. Zhang, “A routing algorithm based on dynamic forecast
of vehicle speed and position in VANET,” International Journal of
Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 9, no. 6, p. 390795, 2013.
[15] H. Menouar, I. Guvenc, K. Akkaya, A. S. Uluagac, A. Kadri, and
A. Tuncer, “UAV-enabled intelligent transportation systems for the smart
city: Applications and challenges,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 22–28, March 2017.
[16] T. Clausen and P. Jacquet, “Optimized link state routing protocol
(OLSR),” RFC Editor, RFC 3626, October 2003.
[17] B. Sliwa, R. Falkenberg, and C. Wietfeld, “A simple scheme for
distributed passive load balancing in mobile ad-hoc networks,” in IEEE
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Spring), Sydney, Jun 2017.
[18] B. Sliwa, T. Liebig, R. Falkenberg, J. Pillmann, and C. Wietfeld,
“Machine learning based context-predictive car-to-cloud communication
using multi-layer connectivity maps for upcoming 5G networks,” in 2018
IEEE 88th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), Chicago, USA,
Aug 2018.
[19] B. Sliwa, “Simulation model and raw results,” Oct 2018. [Online].
Available: http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1466638
[20] B. Sliwa, J. Pillmann, F. Eckermann, L. Habel, M. Schreckenberg,
and C. Wietfeld, “Lightweight joint simulation of vehicular mobility
and communication with LIMoSim,” in IEEE Vehicular Networking
Conference (VNC), Torino, Italy, Nov 2017.
[21] D. Behnke, P. Bok, and C. Wietfeld, “UAV-based connectivity mainte-

Fig. 10. Performance comparison using DDD mobility for UAV-based plume
exploration (Urban channel, 10 UAVs).

Fig. 11.
Performance comparison for the vehicular network provisioning
scenario (Urban channel, 30 vehicles).

Speed [km/h]0.650.70.750.80.850.90.951Packet Delivery RatioPredictive B.A.T.M.A.N. VAODVB.A.T.M.A.N. IIIAODVOLSR25507510012515017520012345678910Traffic Load [MBit/s]0.60.650.70.750.80.850.90.951Packet Delivery Ratio12345678910Number ofStreamsParallel 2 MBit/s0.650.70.750.80.850.90.951Packet Delivery Ratio5101520Delay [ms]Routing Protocol0.750.80.850.90.95Packet Delivery RatioAODVOLSRB.A.T.M.A.N.IIIPredictiveB.A.T.M.A.N. V0.550.60.650.70.75Packet Delivery Ratio0510152025303540Delay [ms]AODVOLSRB.A.T.M.A.N.IIIPredictiveB.A.T.M.A.N. Vnance for borderline detection,” in 2013 IEEE 77th Vehicular Technology
Conference (VTC Spring), June 2013, pp. 1–6.
[22] ETSI, “Intelligent transport systems (ITS); vehicular communications;
basic set of applications; deﬁnitions,” ETSI TR 102 638 V1.1.1 (2009-
06), Tech. Rep., 2009.

