9
1
0
2

v
o

N

1
2

]

O

L

.

s

c

[

2
v
4
4
8
9
0

.

2
0
9
1

:

v

i

X

r

a

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

Laura Giordano1 and Alberto Policriti2

1 DISIT - Universit `a del Piemonte Orientale - Alessandria, Italy -

laura.giordano@uniupo.it

2 Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche, Informatiche e Fisiche, Universit `a di Udine
Istituto di Genomica Applicata, Parco Scientiﬁco e Tecnologico “L. Danieli”, Italy -

alberto.policriti@uniud.it

Abstract. We explore the relationships between Description Logics and Set The-
ory. The study is carried on using, on the set-theoretic side, a very rudimentary ax-
iomatic set theory Ω , consisting of only four axioms characterizing binary union,
set difference, inclusion, and the power-set. An extension of ALC , ALCΩ , is then
deﬁned in which concepts are naturally interpreted as sets living in Ω -models.
In ALCΩ not only membership between concepts is allowed—even admitting
circularity—but also the power-set construct is exploited to add metamodeling
capabilities. We investigate translations of ALCΩ into standard description log-
ics as well as a set-theoretic translation. A polynomial encoding of ALCΩ in
ALCOI proves the validity of the ﬁnite model property as well as an E X P -
T IM E upper bound on the complexity of concept satisﬁability. We develop a set-
theoretic translation of ALCΩ in the theory Ω , exploiting a technique proposed
for translating normal modal and polymodal logics into Ω . Finally, we show that
the fragment LCΩ of ALCΩ , which does not admit roles and individual names,
is as expressive as ALCΩ

Abstract. We explore the relationships between Description Logics and Set The-
ory. The study is carried on using, on the set-theoretic side, a very rudimentary
axiomatic set theory Ω , consisting of only four axioms characterizing binary
union, set difference, inclusion, and the power-set. An extension of ALC , dubbed
ALCΩ , is deﬁned in which concepts are naturally interpreted as sets living in
Ω -models. In ALCΩ not only membership between concepts is allowed—even
admitting membership circularity—but also the power-set construct is exploited
to add metamodeling capabilities. We investigate translations of ALCΩ into stan-
dard description logics as well as a set-theoretic translation. A polynomial encod-
ing of ALCΩ in ALCOI proves the validity of the ﬁnite model property as well
as an E X PT IM E upper bound on the complexity of concept satisﬁability. We de-
velop a set-theoretic translation of ALCΩ in the theory Ω , exploiting a technique
proposed for translating normal modal and polymodal logics into Ω . Finally, we
show that the fragment LCΩ of ALCΩ not admitting roles and individual names,
is as expressive as ALCΩ .

1 Introduction

Concept and concept constructors in Description Logics (DLs) allow to manage infor-
mation built-up and stored as collections of elements of a given domain. In this paper

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

we would like to take the above statement “seriously” and put forward a DL doubly
linked with a (very simple, axiomatic) set theory. Such a logic will be suitable to ma-
nipulate concepts (also called classes in OWL [29]) as ﬁrst-class citizens, in the sense
that it will allow the possibility to have concepts as instances (a.k.a. elements) of other
concepts. From the set-theoretic point of view this is the way to proceed, as stated in
the following quotation from the celebrated Naive Set Theory ([17]):

Sets, as they are usually conceived, have elements or members. An element of a
set may be a wolf, a grape, or a pidgeon. It is important to know that a set itself
may also be an element of some other set. [...] What may be surprising is not
so much that sets may occur as elements, but that for mathematical purposes
no other elements need ever be considered.

P. HALMO S

Also in the Description Logic arena the idea of enhancing the language of descrip-
tion logics with statements of the form C ∈ D , with C and D concepts, is not new, as
assertions of the form D(A), with A a concept name, are already allowed in OWL-Full
[29]. Here, we do not consider roles, i.e. relations among individuals (also called prop-
erties in OWL), as possible instances of concepts. However, we would like to push the
usage of membership among concepts a little forward, allowing not only the possibility
of stating that an arbitrary concept C can be thought of as an instance of another one
(C ∈ D)—or even as an instance of itself (C ∈ C )—but also opening to the possibil-
ity of talking about all possible sub-concepts of C , that is adding memberships to the
power-set Pow(C ) of C .
In order to realize our plan we introduce a DL, to be dubbed ALC Ω , whose two
parents are ALC and a rudimentary (ﬁnitely axiomatized) set theory Ω .
Considering an example taken from [31,25], using membership axioms, we can
represent the fact that eagles are in the red list of endangered species by the axiom
Eagle ∈ RedListSpecies and that Harry is an eagle, by the assertion Eagle (harry ) . We
could further consider a concept ModiﬁableList , consisting of those lists that can be
modiﬁed and, for example, it would be reasonable to ask RedListSpecies ∈ Modiﬁable
List but, more interestingly, we would also clearly want ModiﬁableList ∈ ModiﬁableList .
The power-set concept, Pow(C ), allows to capture in a natural way the interac-
tions between concepts and metaconcepts. Considering again the example above, the
statement “all instances of species in the red list are not allowed to be hunted”, can
be represented by the concept inclusion axiom: RedListSpecies ⊑ Pow(CannotHunt ),
meaning that all the instances in the RedListSpecies (as the class Eagle ) are collections
of individuals of the class CannotHunt . Notice, however, that Pow(C annotH unt) is
not limited to include RedListSpecies but can include a much larger universe of sets
(e.g. anything belonging to Pow(Humans )).
Motik has shown in [25] that the semantics of metamodeling adopted in OWL-Full
leads to undecidability already for ALC -Full, due to the free mixing of logical and
metalogical symbols. In [25], limiting this free mixing but allowing atomic names to
be interpreted as concepts and to occur as instances of other concepts, two alternative
semantics (the Contextual π-semantics and the Hilog ν -semantics) are proposed for
metamodeling. Decidability of SHOIQ extended with metamodeling is proved under
either one of the two proposed semantics. Many other approaches to metamodeling

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

3

have been proposed in the literature, including membership among concepts. Most of
them [3,11,19,22,16] are based on a Hilog semantics, while [28,26] deﬁne extensions
of OWL DL and of SHIQ (respectively), based on semantics interpreting concepts
as well-founded sets—i.e. sets with no cycles or inﬁnite descending chains of ∈-related
sets. None of these proposals includes the power-set concept constructor in the language
apart from [3], where a way of representing the power-set in description logics was
suggested.

Here, we propose an extension of ALC with power-set concepts and membership ax-
ioms among concepts, whose semantics is naturally deﬁned using sets (not necessarily
well-founded) living in Ω -models. We ﬁrst prove that ALC Ω is decidable by deﬁning,
for any ALC Ω knowledge base K , a polynomial translation K T into ALCOI , exploit-
ing a technique—originally proposed and studied in [10] for deﬁning a set-theoretic
translation of normal modal logics —consisting in identifying the membership relation
∈ with the accessibility relation of a normal modality. Such an identiﬁcation naturally
leads to a correspondence between the power-set operator and the modal necessity op-
erator ✷, a correspondence used here to translate power-set concepts into ∀R.C -type
concepts. We show that the translation K T enjoys the ﬁnite model property and exploit
it in the proof of completeness of the translation. From the translation in ALCOI we
also get an EX PT IME upper bound on the complexity of concept satisﬁability in ALC Ω .
Interestingly enough, our translation has strong relations with the ﬁrst-order reductions
in [15,19,22].

We further exploit the correspondence between ∈ and the accessibility relation of
a normal modality in another direction (the direction considered in [10]), to provide
a polynomial set-theoretic translation of ALC Ω in the set theory Ω . Our aim is to un-
derstand the real nature of the power-set concept in ALC Ω , as well as showing that a
description logic with just the power-set concept, but no roles and no individual names,
is as expressive as ALC Ω .

We proceed step by step by ﬁrst deﬁning a set-theoretic translation of ALC with
empty ABox (in Section 5.1), directly exploiting Schild’s correspondence result [30]
and the set-theoretic translation for normal polymodal logics in [10]. Then, we extend
the translation to ALC Ω , ﬁrst considering (in Section 5.2) the fragment of ALC Ω con-
taining union, intersection, (set-)difference, complement, and power-set (but neither
roles nor named individuals) and we show that this fragment, that we call LC Ω , has
an immediate set-theoretic translation into Ω , where the power-set concept is translated
to the power-set in Ω . Finally, (in Section 5.3) we provide an encoding of the whole
ALC Ω into LC Ω . This encoding shows that LC Ω is as expressive as ALC Ω and also
provides, as a by-product, a set-theoretic translation of ALC Ω where the membership
relation ∈ is used to capture both the roles Ri and the membership relation in ALC Ω .
The full path leads to a set-theoretic translation of both the universal restriction and
power-set concept of ALC Ω in the theory Ω using the single relational symbol ∈.

The outline of the paper is the following. Section 2 recalls the deﬁnition of the
description logics ALC and ALCOI , and of the set theory Ω . Section 3 introduces the
logic ALC Ω . Section 4 provides a translation of the logic ALC Ω into the description
logic ALCOI . Section 5 develops set-theoretic translations for ALC and LCΩ and an

4

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

encoding of ALC Ω into LC Ω . Section 6 contains some discussion, Section 7 describes
related work and Section 8 concludes the paper.

2 Preliminaries

2.1 The description logics ALC and ALCOI

Let NC be a set of concept names, NR a set of role names and NI a set of individual
names. The set C of ALC concepts can be deﬁned inductively as follows:
- A ∈ NC , ⊤ and ⊥ are concepts in C ;

- if C, D ∈ C and R ∈ NR , then C ⊓ D , C ⊔ D , ¬C, ∀R.C, ∃R.C are concepts in

C .

A knowledge base (KB) K is a pair (T , A), where T is a TBox and A an ABox. T is a
set of concept inclusions (or subsumptions) C ⊑ D , where C, D are concepts in C . A
is a set of assertions of the form C (a) and R(a, b) where C is a concept, R ∈ NR , and

a, b ∈ NI .

An interpretation for ALC (see [2]) is a pair I = h∆, ·I i where: ∆ is a domain—
a set whose elements are denoted by x, y , z , . . . —and ·I is an extension function that
maps each concept name C ∈ NC to a set C I ⊆ ∆, each role name R ∈ NR to a
binary relation RI ⊆ ∆ × ∆, and each individual name a ∈ NI to an element aI ∈ ∆.
It is extended to complex concepts as follows: ⊤I = ∆, ⊥I = ∅, (¬C )I = ∆\C I ,

(C ⊓ D)I = C I

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

5

2.2 The theory Ω

The ﬁrst-order axiomatic set theory Ω at the ground of our translation, consists of four
extremely simple axioms (partially) characterizing the binary constructors union and
set-difference, as well as the power-set constructor. The underlying language is reduced
to the relation symbols denoting membership and inclusion. More formally:

Deﬁnition 2. Consider a ﬁrst order language with two binary relational symbols de-
noted by ∈ and ⊆, (to be used in inﬁx notation). Let ∪ and \ two binary functional
symbols (also used in the customary inﬁx notation) and let Pow be a unary function
symbol.
The axiomatic set theory Ω consists of the following collection of four axioms:

1. x ∈ y ∪ z ↔ x ∈ y ∨ x ∈ z ;
2. x ∈ y\z ↔ x ∈ y ∧ x 6∈ z ;
3. x ⊆ y ↔ ∀z (z ∈ x → z ∈ y );
4. x ∈ Pow (y ) ↔ x ⊆ y ,

completed with the standard deduction rules of generalization and modus-ponens.

The above theory must be intended as a minimal Hilbert-style axiomatic system for
set theory. When thinking of speciﬁc models of Ω , however, we can clearly think of
structures satisfying extra axioms. In particular, for example, the familiar well-founded
models of set theories, are perfectly legitimate models of Ω , in which the extra axiom of
well-foundedness—implying that ∈ cannot form cycles or inﬁnite descending chains—
holds. For instance let x = {∅, {∅}}. x is a ﬁnite well-founded set, and the sets ∅ and
{∅} are elements of x. Instead, the set y = {∅, {∅, {∅, {. . .}}} is ﬁnite but not well-
founded.
Whatever the axioms satisﬁed by the Ω -model under consideration are, however,
everything in the domain of such a model is supposed to be a set. As a consequence, a
set will have (only) sets as its elements. Moreover, as observed, circular deﬁnitions of
sets are not forbidden. That is, for example, there are models of Ω in which there are
sets admitting themselves as elements. For instance, the set y above could simply be
deﬁned as y = {∅, y} and has elements ∅ and y itself.
Finally, not postulating in Ω any explicit “axiomatic link” between membership ∈
and equality—more precisely: having no extensionality axiom—, there exist Ω -models
in which there are different sets with equal collection of elements. One (elementary)
consequence of the extensionality axiom is the familiar fact that if a ⊆ b and b ⊆ a,
then a = b. In non-extensional models, instead, there can be pairwise distinct sets
included in each other. The set x′ = {a, b, {b, c}} with a, b and c pairwise distinct and
such that a, b, c ⊆ ∅, does not satisfy extensionality as a, b and c are different sets with
the same (empty) extension.

Deﬁnition 3. Ω -models are ﬁrst order interpretations M = (U , ·M ) satisfying the
axioms of the theory Ω . The universe U is the domain of interpretation of M and, ·M is
an interpretation function mapping each symbol Pow , ∪, \ of the language to a function
over U (that is, Pow M : U → U , ∪M : U × U → U and \M : U × U → U ) and each
predicate symbol ∈ and ⊆ to a binary relation over U (that is, ∈M and ⊆M ).

6

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

Below, for sake of readability, we will avoid superscripts in ∈M , ⊆M , Pow M , ∪M ,
\M .

Observe that the universe U of any Ω -model M must be inﬁnite, as any element in
U must have its power-set in U and, as an elementary consequence of Cantor’s Theorem
(see [21]), |P ow(x)| > |x| when |x| is ﬁnite. This closure with respect to the use of the
power-set operator produces the most natural Ω -model, a well-founded one in which
extensionality holds—and hence different sets are, in fact, extensionally different.

Deﬁnition 4. The hereditarily ﬁnite well-founded sets HF denote the Ω -model M =
(U , ·M ) such that
- U is HF = Sn∈N
HFn , where HF0 = ∅; and HFn+1 = Pow (HFn ), for all i ∈ N;
- ·M it the natural interpretations of ∈, ⊆, Pow , ∪ and \ in HF.
By the above observation H F is minimal among the well-founded models of Ω in that
it can be embedded in any model of Ω . In HF (sometimes denoted also as HF0 ) every
system of set-theoretic equations of the form:

x1 = {x1,1 , . . . , x1,m1 };
x2 = {x2,1 , . . . , x2,m2 };

...

...

xn = {xn,1 , . . . , xn,mn },




where n is ﬁnite, and xi,j is one among x1 , . . . , xi−1 for i = 1, . . . , n and j =
1, . . . , mi , ﬁnds a unique solution. Hence, HF can be even identiﬁed with the collec-
tion of such systems of equations which, taken individually, are actually in bijective
correspondence with the adjacency matrices of ﬁnite graphs.
Insisting that xi,j must be one of the left-hand side of equations deﬁning an xk with
k < i, guarantees that a solution can be found in an ordered manner. In fact, it can
be easily proved (even by an elementary graph-theoretic argument), that whenever a
solution exists, every xi can be found in HFi+1 . As an example, the set x = {∅, {∅}}
above is in HF0 , and can be deﬁned by the system of equations: x1 = {x2 , x3 }; x2 =

{x3}; x3 = {}.

If we drop the above mentioned index-ordering restriction (thereby allowing, for in-
stance, such an equation as x = {x}), in order to guarantee the existence of solutions in
the model we need to work with universes richer than HF. The most natural (and min-
imal) among such universes is a close relative of HF0 , goes under the name of HF1/2 ,
the universe of (rational) hypersets (see [1,27]), and can be deﬁned as the extension of
HF obtained postulating unique solution to all ﬁnite systems of equations of the above
form—no constraint on the indexes of the xi,j ’s, that now can be one among x1 , . . . , xn .
An example of hypersets in HF1/2 is the set y = {∅, {∅, {∅, {. . .}}} above, obtained as
the solution of the system of equations {y = {∅, y}}.
The universe HF1/2 of rational hypersets is the one we will mostly use. The ele-
ments in HF1/2 are called rational in analogy to rational numbers, and HF1/2 can be
further extended (to HF1 ), admitting even hypersets characterised by inﬁnite systems
of set-theoretic equations (with a unique solution) only.

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

7

A complete discussion relative to universes of sets that can be used as models of
Ω goes beyond the scope of this paper. However, it is convenient to point out that, in
all cases of interest for us here, an especially simple view of Ω -models can be given
using ﬁnite graphs. Actually, HF0 or HF1/2 can be identiﬁed as the collection of ﬁnite
graphs—either acyclic or cyclic, respectively—, where sets are nodes and arcs depict
the membership relation among sets (see [27]). Given one such membership graph G,
its nodes represent a (hyper)set s together with the elements of the transitive closure of
s (i.e. the elements of s, the elements of the elements of s, the elements of the elements
of the elements s, ... . See Deﬁnition 6).
More precisely, an hereditarily ﬁnite set can be uniquely represented by a ﬁnite,
acyclic, oriented and extensional (different nodes have different collections of succes-
sors) graph, with the edge relation h → h′ standing for h ∋ h′ . Any such graph as a
single source, called the point of the graph, and a single sink, that is the empty set ∅.
This gives us the alternative—more graph-theoretic—view of the model HF0 , whose
domain is now the collection of ﬁnite, well-founded, oriented and extensional graphs.
A formal deﬁnition of HF1/2 can be given using the above outlined graph-theoretic
rendering of HF0 : simply drop acyclicity and replace extensionality with the require-
ment that no two nodes of the graph are bisimilar (see [27] for the deﬁnition of bisim-
ilarity relation and recall that HF0 ⊂ HF1/2 ). We keep also the requirement that a
point—i.e. a node from which every other node is reachable—of the graph is provided.

Deﬁnition 5. The hereditarily ﬁnite hypersets HF1/2 denote the Ω -model M = (U , ·M )
such that
- U is the collection of pointed, ﬁnite, oriented graphs whose only bisimulation
relation is the identity;
- ·M is deﬁned for ∈ as follows: h′ ∈M h holds when h′ is the sub-graph whose
point is one of the successor of the point of h. The remaining operators are interpreted
following their deﬁnition.

A ﬁnal further enrichment of both HF0 and HF1/2 is obtained by adding atoms
(sometimes called urelements) to their domain universes. Atoms can be thought as pair-
wise distinct copies of the empty set, are going to be denoted by a1 , a2 , . . ., and col-
lectively represented by A = {a1 , a2 , . . .}. The resulting universes will be denoted by
HF0 (A) and HF1/2 (A). When considering a model M of Ω over the atoms in A, we
mean that A ⊆ U .
While H F 0 , HF1/2 and HF1 only contain ﬁnite sets, other models of Ω may also
admit inﬁnite sets, such as the inﬁnite set of natural numbers.
In the next section, we will regard the domain ∆ of a DL interpretation as a (ﬁnite
or inﬁnite) transitive set in a universe of an Ω -model, i.e. ∆ will be a set of sets in (a
universe of a model of) the theory Ω rather than as a set of individuals, as customary in
description logics.

Deﬁnition 6. A element x in an Ω -model is said to be a transitive set if it satisﬁes the

formula: (∀y ∈ x)(y ⊆ x).

For example, the set x = {a, b, c, {a, b}} over A (with A = {a, b, c, . . .}) is transitive,
while the set x′ = {a, c, {a, b}} is not transitive, as {a, b} ∈ x′ but {a, b} 6⊆ x′ .

8

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

Both x and x′ are well-founded sets, instead the set of equations: {y = {a, b, x}, x =
{b, y}} deﬁnes a collection of hypersets represented by the graph in Figure 1, including
the hyperset y = {a, b, {b, y}}, which is neither well-founded nor transitive (y is an
hyperset in HF1/2 (A)).

y

b

a

x

Fig. 1. Example of a hyperset y , built from atoms a and b, which is neither well-founded
nor transitive: x is an element of y but is not included in y , since y (that belongs to the
transitive closure of y ) is not among the elements of y .

3 The description logic ALCΩ

We start from the observation that in ALC concepts are interpreted as sets (namely, sets
of domain elements) and we generalize ALC by allowing concepts to be interpreted as
sets living in a model of the set theory Ω . In addition, we extend the language of ALC
by introducing the power-set as a new concept constructor, and allowing membership
relations among concepts in the knowledge base. We call ALC Ω the resulting extension

of ALC .

As before, let NI , NC , and NR be the set of individual names, concept names,
and role names in the language, respectively. In building complex concepts, in addition
to the constructs of ALC , we also consider the difference \ and the power-set Pow
constructs.

Deﬁnition 7. The set of ALC Ω concepts are deﬁned inductively as follows:
- A ∈ NC , ⊤ and ⊥ are ALC Ω concepts;
- if C, D are ALC Ω concepts and R ∈ NR , then the following are ALC Ω concepts:

C ⊓ D , C ⊔ D , ¬C, C \D , Pow(C ), ∀R.C, ∃R.C

While the concept C \D can be easily deﬁned as C ⊓ ¬D in ALC , this is not the case for
the concept Pow(C ). Informally, the instances of concept Pow(C ) are all the subsets of
the instances of concept C , which are “visible” in (i.e. which belong to) ∆.
Besides usual assertions of the forms C (a) and R(a, b) with a, b ∈ NI , ALC Ω
allows in the ABox concept membership axioms and role membership axioms of the
forms C ∈ D and (C, D) ∈ R, respectively, where C and D are ALC Ω concepts and
R is a role name.

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

9

Considering again the example in Section 1, the additional expressivity of the lan-
guage, in which general concepts (and not only concept names) can be instances of other
concepts, allows for instance to represent the statement that bears which are polar are in
the red list of endangered species, by axiom PolarCreature ⊓ Bear ∈ RedListSpecies .
We can further represent the fact the polar bears are more endangered than eagles
by adding a role moreEndangered and the role membership axiom (PolarCreature ⊓
Bear , Eagle ) ∈ moreEndangered . The inclusion RedListSpecies ⊑ Pow(CannotHunt )
means that any element of RedListSpecies (such as Eagle ) is a subset of CannotHunt ,
i.e., each single eagle cannot be hunted. As shown in [25], the meaning of the sentence
“all the instances of species in the Red List are not allowed to be hunted” could be cap-
tured by combining the ν -semantics with SWRL [20], but not by the ν -semantics alone.

We deﬁne a semantics for ALC Ω by extending the ALC semantics in Section 2.1 to
capture the meaning of concepts (including concept Pow(C )) as elements (sets) of the
domain ∆, chosen to be a transitive set (i.e. a set x such that x’s elements are also x’s
subsets, see Deﬁnition 6). Roles are interpreted as binary relations over the domain ∆,
concepts as subsets of ∆, and individual names as elements of a set of atoms A—from
which the sets in ∆ are built.

Deﬁnition 8. An interpretation for ALC Ω is a pair I = h∆, ·I i over a set of atoms A
where:
– the non-empty domain ∆ is a transitive set chosen in the universe U of a model M
of Ω over the atoms in A;
– the extension function ·I maps each concept name A ∈ NC to a subset AI ⊆ ∆,1
each role name R ∈ NR to a binary relation RI ⊆ ∆ × ∆, and each individual
name a ∈ NI to an element aI ∈ A

10

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

while the interpretation of ⊤ must be a set (and all set theoretic operations, including
the power-set, can be applied to it).
While U is always inﬁnite, ∆ is not necessarily an inﬁnite set. Also, the interpreta-
tion of Pow(⊤) is not always the same as that of ⊤. Consider the following example
with ∆ a ﬁnite transitive set:

∆ = {a, b, c, {a, b}, {a, c}}.

By deﬁnition, ⊤I = ∆ and Pow(⊤)I = P ow(∆)

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

11

From this speciﬁcation, we can conclude that both the science and the fantasy
groups have some leader who is a person, and that Alice and Bob participate to the sum-
mer meeting and have paid the registration fee. For instance, as SummerMeeting ∈
Meeting , by inclusion (3), SummerMeeting ∈ Pow(∃has leader .Person ), i.e., Sum -
merMeeting ⊑ ∃has leader .Person . Now, as S cienceGroup ∈ S ummerM eeting ,
then ScienceGroup ∈ ∃has leader .Person , and we can conclude that the Science group
has a leader who is a person.
To see that Bob has paid the registration fee, consider that bob ∈ ScienceGroup . As
Science - Group ∈ SummerMeeting , by (4), ScienceGroup ∈ Pow(∃has paid .Fee ).
Then, ScienceGroup ⊑ ∃has paid .Fee and, therefore, bob ∈ ∃has paid .Fee . Notice
that, instead of axiom (4), we could have introduced the inclusion axiom Meeting ⊑
(Pow(Pow(∃has paid .Fee )) meaning that, for any meeting, all participants have paid
the registration fee.
In the next section, we deﬁne a polynomial encoding of the language ALC Ω into

ALCOI .

4 Translation of ALCΩ into ALCOI

To provide a proof method for ALC Ω , we deﬁne a translation of ALC Ω into the de-
scription logic ALCOI , including inverse roles and nominals. In [10] the membership
relation ∈ is used to represent the accessibility relation R of a normal modal logic. In
this section, vice-versa, we exploit the correspondence between ∈ and the accessibility
relation of a modality, by introducing a new (reserved) role e in NR to represent the
inverse of the membership relation: in any interpretation I , (x, y ) ∈ eI will stand for
y ∈ x. The idea underlying the translation is that each element u of the domain ∆ in an
ALCOI interpretation I = h∆, ·I i can be regarded as the set of all the elements v such

that (u, v) ∈ eI .

The translation of a knowledge base K = (T , A) of ALC Ω into ALCOI can be
deﬁned as follows. First, we associate each concept C of ALC Ω to a concept C T of
ALCOI by replacing all occurrences of the power-set constructor Pow with a concept
involving the universal restriction ∀e (see below). More formally, we inductively deﬁne
the translation C T of C by simply recursively replacing every subconcept Pow(D)
appearing in C by ∀e.DT , while the translation T commutes with concept constructors
in all other cases (and B T = B , for any concept name B ).
Semantically this will result in interpreting any (sub)concept (Pow(D))I by

(∀e.D)I = {x ∈ ∆ | ∀y ((x, y ) ∈ eI → y ∈ DI )},

which, recalling that (x, y ) ∈ eI stands for y ∈ x, characterises the collection of subsets
of DI visible in ∆ (i.e. subsets of DI that are also elements of ∆): (∀e.D)I = {x ∈ ∆ |

∀y (y ∈ x → y ∈ DI )}, that is, (∀e.D)I = {x ∈ ∆ | x ⊆ DI )} = Pow(DI )

12

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

knowledge base K (or in the query) on the l.h.s. of a membership axiom C ∈ D or
(C, D) ∈ R, we extend NI with a new individual name2 eC and we add in T T the
concept equivalence:

C T ≡ ∃e− .{eC }.

(1)

From now on, new individual names such as eC will be called concept individual names.
This equivalence is intended to capture the property that, in all the models I = h∆, ·I i
of K T , eI
C is in relation eI with all and only the instances of concept C T , i.e., for all
C , y ) ∈ eI if and only if y ∈ (C T )I .
As in the case of the power-set constructor, this fact can be veriﬁed by analyzing
the semantics of ∃e− .{eC }:

y ∈ ∆, (eI

(∃e− .{eC })I = {x ∈ ∆ | ∃y ((x, y ) ∈ (e− )I ∧ y ∈ ({eC })I },

which, recalling that e stands for ∋ and interpreting the nominal, will stand for

(∃e− .{eC })I = {x ∈ ∆ | ∃y (x ∈ y ∧ y ∈ {eI
C }} = {x ∈ ∆ | x ∈ eI
C },

which, by concept equivalence (1), is as to say that eI
C and (C T )I have the same exten-
sion.

Remark 1. It is important to notice that every concept individual name of the sort eC
introduced above—that is, every individual name whose purpose is that of providing a
name to the extension of C I —, in general turns out to be in relation e with other ele-
ments of the domain ∆ of I (unless C is an inconsistent concept and its extension is
empty). This is in contrast with the assumption relative to other “standard” individual
names a ∈ NI , for which we will require (¬∃e.⊤)(a) (see below) as they are inter-
preted as atoms.

We deﬁne AT as the set of assertions containing:
- for each concept membership axiom C ∈ D in A, the assertion DT (eC ),
- for each role membership axiom (C, D) ∈ R in A, the assertion R(eC , eD ),
- for each assertion D(a) in A, the assertion DT (a),
- for each assertion R(a, b) in A, the assertion R(a, b) and, ﬁnally,
- for each (standard) individual name a ∈ NI , the assertion (¬∃e.⊤)(a).
As noticed above, the last requirement forces all named individuals (in the language
of K ) to be interpreted as domain elements which are not in relation e with any other
element.
Let K T = (T T , AT ) be the knowledge base obtained by translating K into ALCOI .

Example 2. Let K = (T , A) be the knowledge base considered above:
T = {RedListSpecies ⊑ Pow(CannotHunt )} and
A = {Eagle (harry ), Eagle ∈ RedListSpecies , PolarCreature ⊓ Bear ∈ RedListSpecies }.
By the translation above, we obtain:
T T = {RedListSpecies ⊑ ∀e .CannotHunt ,
Eagle ≡ ∃e − .{eEagle }, PolarCreature ⊓ Bear ≡ ∃e − .{ePolarCreature⊓Bear } }

2 The symbol eC should remind the e-xtension of C .

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

13

AT = {Eagle (harry ), RedListSpecies (eEagle ), RedListSpecies (ePolarCreature⊓Bear ),

(¬∃e .⊤)(harry ) }

K T entails CannotHunt (harry ) in ALCOI . In fact, from RedListSpecies (eEagle )
and Red - ListSpecies ⊑ ∀e .CannotHunt , it follows that, in all models of K T , eI
∈ (∀e .Cannot - Hunt )I . Furthermore, from Eagle ≡ ∃e − .{eEagle } and the asser-
tion Eagle (harry ) , it follows that (e I
Eagle , harry I ) ∈ e I holds. Hence, harry I ∈
CannotHunt I . As this holds in all models of K T , CannotHunt (harry ) is a logical
consequence of K T . It is easy to see that Eagle ⊑ CannotHunt follows from K T as
well.

Eagle

Let F be a query of the form C ⊑ D , C (a) or C ∈ D We assume that all the
individual names, concept names and role names occurring in F also occur in K and
we deﬁne a translation F T of the query F as follows:

- if F is a subsumption C ⊑ D , then F T is the subsumption C T ⊑ DT ;
- if F is an assertion C (a), then F T is the assertion C T (a);
- if F is a membership axiom C ∈ D ((C , D ) ∈ R , respectively), then F T is
the assertion DT (eC ) (R (eC , eD ), respectively).

In the following we prove the soundness and completeness of the translation of an
ALC Ω knowledge base into ALCOI .

Proposition 1 (Soundness of the translation). The translation of an ALC Ω knowl-
edge base K = (T , A) into ALCOI is sound, that is, for any query F :

K T |=ALCOI F T ⇒ K |=ALCΩ F.

Proof. (Sketch) By contraposition, assume K 6|=ALCΩ F and let I = h∆, ·I i be a
model of K in ALC Ω that falsiﬁes F . ∆ is a transitive set living in a model of Ω with
universe U . We build an ALCOI interpretation I ′ = h∆′ , ·I ′
i, which is going to be a
model of K T falsifying F in ALCOI , by letting:

- ∆′ = ∆;

- for all B ∈ NC , B I ′
- for all roles R ∈ NR , RI ′

= B I ;
= RI ;
- for all x, y ∈ ∆′ , (x, y ) ∈ eI ′

if and only if y ∈ x;
- for all (standard) individual name a ∈ NI , aI ′

= aI ∈ A

14

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

We can prove by induction on the structural complexity of the concepts that, for all

x ∈ ∆′ ,

x ∈ (C T )I ′

if and only if x ∈ C I

(2)

and show that all the axioms and assertions in K T are satisﬁed in I ′ , and F T is falsiﬁed
in I ′ .

✷

Before proving completeness of the translation of ALC Ω into ALCOI , we show that,
if the translation K T of a knowledge base K has a model in ALCOI , then it has a ﬁnite
model.

Proposition 2. Let K be a knowledge base in ALC Ω and let K T be its translation in
ALCOI . If K T has a model in ALCOI , then it has a ﬁnite model.

Proof. We prove this result by providing an alternative (but equivalent) translation
K T (¬) of K in the description logic ALC (¬), using a single negated role ¬e.
ALC (¬) extends ALC with role complement operator, where, for any role R, the
role ¬R is the negation of role R, where (x, y ) ∈ (¬R)I if and only if (x, y ) 6∈ RI .
In the translation, we exploit ¬e to capture non-membership, where (x, y ) ∈ (¬e)I if
and only if (x, y ) 6∈ eI (i.e., in set terms, y 6∈ x). Decidability of concept satisﬁability
in ALC (¬) has been proved by Lutz and Sattler in [24]. The ﬁnite model property
of a language with a single negated role ¬e can be proved as done in [12] (Section
2) for a logic with the “window modality”, by standard ﬁltration, extended to deal with
additional K-modalities (for the other roles) as in the proof in [4]. Indeed, as observed in
[24], the “window operator”
studied in [12] is strongly related to a negated modality,
as φ can be written as [¬R]¬φ.
The translation K T (¬) can be deﬁned modifying K T by replacing the concept equiv-
alence C T ≡ ∃e− .{eC } with the assertions: (∀e.C T )(eC ) and (∀(¬e).(¬C T ))(eC ).
One can show that from any model I = (∆, ·I ) of K T (¬) we can easily deﬁne
a model of K T in ALCOI , and vice-versa—considering the usual interpretation of
negated roles, inverse roles and nominals. In fact, the semantics of the assertion (∀e.C T )
(eC ) is the following: for all x ∈ ∆, (eI
C , x) ∈ eI ⇒ x ∈ (C T )I , which is equivalent

to ∃e− .{eC } ⊑ C T .

The semantics of the assertion (∀(¬e).(¬C T ))(eC ) is: for all x ∈ ∆, (eI
C , x) ∈ eI , which is the

eI ⇒ x 6∈ (C T )I , i.e., for all x ∈ ∆, x ∈ (C T )I ⇒ (eI

C , x) 6∈

semantics of C T ⊑ ∃e− .{eC }.
We conclude the proof by observing that, if K T has a model in ALCOI , there is
a model of K T (¬) . Then, by the ﬁnite model property of ALC (¬), K T (¬) must have a
ﬁnite model, from which a ﬁnite model of K T can be deﬁned.

✷

As a byproduct of the above proposition, we have that any ALC Ω knowledge base K
has a translation K T (¬) in the description logic ALC (¬), which uses a single negated
role ¬e, and that each model of K T (¬) can be mapped to a corresponding ALCOI
model of K T , and vice-versa.
To conclude our analysis we now prove the completeness of the translation K T of
a knowledge base K in ALCOI .

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

15

Proposition 3 (Completeness of the translation). The translation of an ALC Ω knowl-
edge base K = (T , A) into ALCOI is complete, that is, for any query F :

K |=ALCΩ F ⇒ K T |=ALCOI F T .

Proof. We prove the completeness of the translation by contraposition. Let K T 6|=ALCOI
F T . Then there is a model I = h∆, ·I i of K T in ALCOI such that I falsiﬁes F . We
show that we can build a model J = hΛ, ·J i of K in ALC Ω , where the domain Λ is a
transitive set in the universe HF1/2 (A) consisting of all the hereditarily ﬁnite rational
hypersets built from atoms in A = {a0 , a1 , . . .}. As a matter of fact, the domain Λ is
to be extended possibly duplicating sets representing extensionally equal but pairwise
distinct sets/elements in ∆.
We deﬁne Λ starting from the graph3 G = h∆, eI i, whose nodes are the elements
of ∆ and whose arcs are the pairs (x, y ) ∈ eI . Notice that, by Proposition 2, the graph
G can be assumed to be ﬁnite. Intuitively, an arc from x to y in G stands for the fact
that y ∈ x.
At this point, let ∆0 = {d1 , . . . , dm} be the elements of ∆ which, in the model
I = h∆, ·I i, are not in relation eI with any other element in ∆ and are non equal to the
interpretation of any concept individual name eC (that is, dj ∈ ∆0 iff there is no y such
that (dj , y ) ∈ eI and there is no concept C such that dj = eI
C ). We deﬁne the M (d)’s
for d ∈ ∆, as the hypesets satisfying the following collection of set-theoretic equations:

M (d) = (cid:26) ak
if d = dk ∈ ∆0 ,
(cid:8)M (d′ ) | (d, d′ ) ∈ eI (cid:9) otherwise.

(3)

Observe that, for the concepts C occurring as l.h.s. of membership axioms, as axiom
C T = ∃e− .{eC } is satisﬁed in the model I of K T , it holds that d′ ∈ (C T )I iff
C , d′ ) ∈ eI . Therefore, for d = eI

C , M (d) = M (eI
C ) = (cid:8)M (d′ ) | (eI
C , d′ ) ∈ eI (cid:9)

(eI
= (cid:8)M (d′ ) | d′ ∈ (C T )I (cid:9).

The above deﬁnition uniquely determines hypersets in HF1/2 (A). This follows from
the fact that all ﬁnite systems of (ﬁnite) set-theoretic equations have a solution in

HF1/2 (A).4

To complete the deﬁnition of J = hΛ, ·J i in such a way to prove that J is a model
of K in ALC Ω falsifying F , we put:

- Λ = {M (d) | d ∈ ∆};
- for all B ∈ NC , B J = {M (d) | d ∈ B I };
- for all roles R ∈ NR such that R 6= e, RJ = {(M (d), M (d′ )) | (d, d′ ) ∈ RI };

- for all standard named individuals a ∈ NI such that aI = dk , let aJ = M (dk ) =

ak ∈ A.

3 Strictly speaking the graph G introduced here is not really necessary: it is just mentioned to
single out the membership relation ∈ from eI more clearly.
4 When eI is a well-founded relation, M (·) is its inductively deﬁned set-theoretic “rendering”
going under the name of Mostowski collapse of eI (see [21]). As a consequence of the dupli-
cation of extensionally equal sets, not only we have the trivial property that, for d, d′ ∈ ∆,
d = d′ implies M (d) = M (d′ ), but also the converse implication, i.e., M (d) = M (d′ )
implies d = d′ .

16

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

By construction, Λ is transitive set in a model M of Ω (in fact, for all M (d) ∈ Λ, if
M (d′ ) ∈ M (d), then (d′ , d) ∈ eI and then d′ ∈ ∆; therefore, M (d′ ) ∈ Λ). Moreover,
it can be proved, by induction on the structural complexity of concepts, that, for all

x ∈ ∆:

M (x) ∈ C J if and only if x ∈ (C T )I .

(4)

Let us consider the interesting case: C = Pow(D). By deﬁnition of T , we have that:

(C T )I = ((Pow(D))T )I = (∀e.DT )I = {x ∈ ∆ | ∀y ((x, y ) ∈ eI → y ∈ (DT )I }

and C J = (Pow(D))J = Pow (DJ )

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

17

5.1 A set theoretic translation of ALC with empty ABox

Let R1 , . . . , Rk be the roles occurring in the knowledge base K = (T , A) and let
A1 , . . . , An be the concept names occurring in K . Given a concept C of ALC , built
from the concept names and role names in K , its set-theoretic translation is a set-

theoretic term C S (x, y1 , . . . , yk , x1 , . . . , xn ), where x, y1 , . . . , yk , x1 , . . . , xn are set-

theoretic variables, inductively deﬁned as follows:

⊤S = x;
AS
(C ⊓ D)S = C S

i = xi , for Ai in K ;

⊥S = ∅;
(¬C )S = x\C S ;

18

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

This set-theoretic translation can then be extended to other constructs of descrip-
tion logics including a set of axioms AxiomH (x, y1 , . . . , yk ), as in [10] to provide the
translation of the speciﬁc axioms of a polymodal logic, as follows:

∀x∀y1 . . . ∀yk (T rans2 (x) ∧ AxiomH (x, y1 , . . . , yk )
→ ∀x1 , . . . , ∀xn (V TBox T → C S

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

19

ABox A (x, x1 , . . . , xn ) = {C S
1 ∈ C S

2

20

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

part of the power-set which is in the set x (the domain ∆) is relevant when evaluating
the axioms in K or a query. In particular, the axioms in the knowledge base are only
required to be satisﬁed over the elements of the transitive set x. Notice that it is the
same in the set-theoretic translation of ALC in Section 5.1: knowledge base axioms are
required to be satisﬁed on the elements of x.
Observe also that, in both the translations of ALC and of LC Ω , ⊤ is interpreted
as the transitive set x. It would not be correct to interpret ⊤ as the universe U of a
model of Ω , as U is not a set. In fact, Pow(⊤) is in the language of concepts and

(Pow(⊤))I = P ow(⊤I )

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

21

h,j ∈ aE

- an inclusion axiom C E ⊓ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ) ⊑ DE , for each C ⊑ D ∈ K ;5
- a membership axiom C E ∈ DE for each C ∈ D in K ;
- a membership axiom aE
i ∈ C E for each C (ai ) in K ;
- membership axioms F i
h , aE
h,j and F i
h,j ∈ Ui for all Ri (ah , aj ) in K ;
- axioms Gi
h , C E
and Gi
Ch ,Cj ∈ Ui for all Ri (Ch , Cj ) in K .6
The following additional axioms are also needed in K E :
Ai ⊑ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ), one for each concept name Ai in K ;
Bi ∈ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ), one for each individual name ai in K ;
C E ∈ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ), one for each C on the l.h.s of a membership in K or in the
query;

Ch ,Cj ∈ C E

j ∈ F i

j ∈ Gi

Ch ,Cj

¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ) ⊑ Pow(¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ) ⊔ Pow(¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk )))

The ﬁrst three axioms avoid that concept names Ai and Bi , and the concepts C occur-
ring on the l.h.s. of membership axioms, are interpreted as elements of Uj , for some j .
The last axiom enforces the property that: for each z ∈ ∆\(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk )I , if u ∈ z ,
for an instance u of some Ui , and v ∈ u, then v ∈ ∆\(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk )I (we call this

axiom T rans2 (∆\(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk )I ).

For a query F over the language of the knowledge base K , if F is an inclusion
C ⊑ D , its translation is C E ⊑ DE ; if F is an assertion C (ai ), its translation is
i ∈ C E ; if F is a membership axioms C ∈ D , its translation is C E ∈ DE .

aE

Example 3. To see an example of the encoding above, let us consider a variant of knowl-
edge base in Example 2. Let K = (T , A) where:
T = {RedListSpecies ⊑ Pow(CannotHunt ), Eagle ⊑ ∀hasMother .Eagle ,
RedListSpecies ⊑ ∀hasScientiﬁcName .Name }
A = {Eagle (harry ), Eagle ∈ RedListSpecies , PolarCreature ⊓ Bear ∈ RedListSpecies ,
(PolarCreature ⊓ Bear , Eagle ) ∈ moreEndangered }
By the translation above, we obtain the following LC Ω knowledge base K E :
RedListSpecies ⊑ Pow(UhasMother ⊔ UhasSciName ⊔ CannotHunt ),
Eagle ⊑ Pow(¬UhasMother ⊔ Pow(Eagle )),
RedListSpecies ⊑ Pow(¬UhasSciName ⊔ Pow(Name )),
Bharry ∈ Eagle , Eagle ∈ RedListSpecies , PolarCreature ⊓ Bear ∈ RedListSpecies ,

Eagle ∈ G mE
PB ,E ∈ PolarCreature ⊓ Bear ,
Eagle ⊑ ¬(UhasMother ⊔ UhasSciName ), and the same for the other concept names

PB ,E , G mE

Bharry ∈ ¬(UhasMother ⊔ UhasSciName ),

PolarCreature ⊓ Bear ∈ ¬(UhasMother ⊔ UhasSciName ),
where GmE
P B ,E is the concept name speciﬁcally introduced for encoding (PolarCreature
⊓Bear , Eagle ) ∈ moreEndangered . The transitivity axiom T rans2 is omitted.

5 Inclusion axioms are only required to hold on domain elements which are not Ui -elements.
6 To translate the assertion Ri (ah , aj ), we need an element u of Ui such that u is an instance of
aE
h and aE
j is an instance of u. We call such an element F i
h,j . Similarly for role membership
axioms Ri (Ch , Cj ). A more direct encoding of role assertions would be possible in the pres-
ence of nominals (i.e., if nominals were admitted in the languages of LCΩ and ALCΩ ) as, for
instance, Ri (ah , bj ) could be equivalently written as ah ∈ ∃Ri .{aj }. However, this would
require moving to a set theory with singleton operators.

22

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

We can prove the soundness and completeness of the encoding of ALC Ω into LC Ω .

Proposition 7 (Soundness and Completeness of the encoding of ALC Ω in LC Ω ).

K |=ALCΩ F if and only if K E |=LCΩ F E

Proof. (⇐) The soundness is proved by contraposition. Assume that K 6|=ALCΩ F ,
then, there is a model I = (∆, ·I ) of K such that F is falsiﬁed in I .
For the ﬁnite model property of ALC Ω , we can assume without loss of generality
that the model I is ﬁnite. To build from I a ﬁnite LCΩ model J = (∆′ , ·J ) of K E
which falsiﬁes F E , we deﬁne a graph G = (N , E ) where: N = ∆ ∪ D1 ∪ . . . ∪ Dk
and Di = {ui
i }. E is deﬁned as follows:

s,t | s, t ∈ ∆ ∧ (s, t) ∈ RI

E = Sk
i=1{(s, ui
s,t ), (ui
s,t , t) | s, t ∈ ∆ ∧ (s, t) ∈ RI
i } ∪ {(s, t) | s, t ∈ ∆ ∧ t ∈ s}

We deﬁne an injection π from the leaves of N , i.e. nodes without any successor, to A
and, for any given d ∈ N , we deﬁne the following hyperset M (d):

M (d) = (cid:26) π(d)
{M (d′ ) | (d, d′ ) ∈ E } otherwise.

if d is a leaf of N ,

The above deﬁnition uniquely determines hypersets in HF1/2 (A).
Let Λ = {M (d) | d ∈ N }, possibly extended by duplicating M(d)’s to represent
extensionally-equal (bisimilar) sets corresponding to pairwise distinct elements in N .
As a consequence, as in previous cases, for d, d′ ∈ N , d = d′ if and only if M (d) =
M (d′ ), i.e., there are distinct sets in Λ for pairwise distinct elements of N .
Observe that, by deﬁnition of Λ, if (s, t) ∈ RI
i , for s, t ∈ ∆, then there is some
d ∈ Di , such that M (d) ∈ M (s) and M (t) ∈ M (d) (and, in particular, d = ui
s,t ); and
vice-versa.
We deﬁne J = h∆′ , ·J i as follows:

- ∆′ = Λ;

- AJ = {M (d) | d ∈ AI } for all A ∈ NC , in the language of ALC Ω ;
- B J
- U J

i = M (aI
i ) = π(aI
i ), i = 1, . . . , r;
i = {M (ui
s,t) | s, t ∈ ∆ and (s, t) ∈ RI
- (F i
h,j )J = M (ui
);
- (Gi

aI
h ,aI
Ch ,Cj )J = M (ui

i };

j

s,t ), for s = C I
h and t = C I
j .

By construction, ∆′ is transitive set in a model M of Ω . Notice that B J
i ) ∈ A,
and hence B J
i has no elements. Notice also that, in the deﬁnition of (Gi
Ch ,Cj )J , s and
t are elements of ∆ and (s, t) ∈ RI
i , so that ui
s,t ∈ E . In fact, s = C I
h and t = C I
j and
Ri (Ch , Cj ) is in A. Therefore, as I satisﬁes the ABox A, (C I
i ⊆ ∆×∆, and
j ∈ ∆. In the following, we let M (Di ) = {M (ui
i }.
It can be shown by induction on the structural complexity of concepts, that, for all
d ∈ ∆, for all concepts C occurring in K (or F ):

h , C I
j ) ∈ RI
s,t) | s, t ∈ ∆ and (s, t) ∈ RI

i = M (aI

C I
h , C I

d ∈ C I if and only if M (d) ∈ (C E )J ,

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

23

which can be used to prove that J is a model of K E that falsiﬁes F E , so that K E 6|=LCΩ
F E .
(⇒) (Sketch) By contraposition, assume that K E 6|=LCΩ F E , then, there is an LC Ω
model J = (∆, ·J ) of K E such that F E is falsiﬁed in J .
For the ﬁnite model property of LC Ω (which is a fragment of ALC Ω ), we can as-
sume without loss of generality that the model J is ﬁnite. We build from J an ALC Ω
model I = (∆′ , ·I ) of K which falsiﬁes F , deﬁning ∆′ as a transitive set in the universe
HF1/2 (A) consisting of all the hereditarily ﬁnite rational hypersets built from atoms in

A = {a0 , a1 , . . .}.

We start from the graph G = (N , E ), with nodes N = ∆\(U J
k ), whose
arcs are deﬁned as follows: E = {(d1 , d2 ) | d1 , d2 ∈ N ∧ d2 ∈ d1}. G is ﬁnite. Observe
that, for each ai in K , B J
i ∈ N , by axiom Bi ∈ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ). Similarly, for each
Ai in K , AJ
We deﬁne an injection π from the leaves of N (i.e. nodes without any successor)
plus the elements B I
r ∈ N to A. For any given d ∈ N , we deﬁne the following
hyperset M (d):

1 ∪ . . . ∪ U J

1 , . . . , B I

i ⊆ N .

M (d) = (cid:26) π(d)
{M (d′ ) | (d, d′ ) ∈ E } otherwise.

if d is a leaf of N or d = B J
j for some j ,

(7)

The above deﬁnition uniquely determines hypersets in HF1/2 (A).
∆′ = {M (d) | d ∈ N }, possibly extended by duplicating M(d)’s to represent
extensionally-equal (bisimilar) sets corresponding to pairwise distinct elements in N .
We complete the deﬁnition of I = h∆′ , ·I i as follows:

- AI = {M (d) | M (d) ∈ ∆′ ∧ d ∈ AJ }, for all A ∈ NC ;
i = {(M (d), M (d′ )) | M (d), M (d′ ) ∈ ∆′ ∧ ∃u ∈ U J
i (u ∈ d ∧ d′ ∈ u)},

- RI
for all roles Ri occurring in K ; RI
i = ∅ for all other roles R ∈ NR ;
- aI
i ) for all named individuals ai occurring in K ;
1 ) for all other a ∈ NI .
By construction, ∆′ is a transitive set in a model M of Ω . As AJ ⊆ ∆\(U J
k ),
i ⊆ ∆′ . To complete the proof it can be shown that, for all M (d) ∈ ∆′ , and C in K
(or in F ):

i = M (B J
i ) = π(B J
aI = M (B J

1 ∪ . . . ∪ U J

AI

M (d) ∈ C I if and only if d ∈ (C E )J

which can be used to prove that J is a model of K that falsiﬁes F .

✷

Combining the above encoding and the set-theoretic translation for LCΩ of Section
5.2, we obtain a set-theoretic translation for ALC Ω .
Let R1 , . . . , Rk and A1 , . . . , An be, respectively, the roles and the concept names
occurring in the knowledge base K = (T , A) (or in the query). Given a concept C
of ALC Ω , built from the concept, role and individual names in K , its set-theoretic
translation (C E )S is a set-theoretic term C ∗ (x, y1 , . . . , yk , x1 , . . . , xn+m ), where we
let U S
i = yi , and we let the variables xn+1 , . . . , xn+m to be the set-theoretic translation
of the additional concept names (Bj , F i
h,j and Gi
) introduced to encode assertions.
C ∗ is deﬁned inductively as follows:

Ch ,Cj

24

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

⊤∗ = x;
A∗
(C ⊓ D)∗ = C S

i = xi , for Ai in K ;

⊥∗ = ∅;
(¬C )∗ = x\C S ;

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

25

5.1, are in the language of LC Ω and hence are interpreted in ∆ as all other concept
names.

6 Discussion

We consider here some consequences of the above results in view of possible extensions
of the correspondence we introduced to deal with further DL constructs or set-theoretic
operators.
First of all, observe that the complementary problem to subsumption in ALC Ω is
satisﬁability of a concept C with respect to a general knowledge base K (see Section
2.1). By the result in Corollary 1, this problem corresponds to the satisﬁability of a
formula in the existential fragment of Ω , i.e. the satisﬁability of a formula of Ω of the
form ∃x, y1 , . . . , yk , x1 , . . . , xn+m φ, where φ is unquantiﬁed in the basic language of
Ω . In fact, we can reformulate Corollary 1 as follows:
K 6|=ALCΩ C ⊑ D ( i.e., C ⊓ ¬D is satisﬁable in ALC Ω with respect to K )
iff there is a model of Ω satisfying the formula:
A ∧ V TBox ∗

∃x, ∃y1 , . . . , ∃yk (T rans(x)∧
∃x1 , . . . , ∃xn+m (V ABox ∗

T ∧¬(C ∗

26

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

logic Km [5]). From the semantic point of view, by well-foundednness, all circular
membership relationships among concepts are ruled out; by extensionality, any two
concepts in a model of ALC Ω
we having the same elements, and such that the same
domain elements are accessible through the relations associated with roles Ri , have
to be considered equal. For instance, if we have a knowledge base containing the ax-
ioms E ag le ≡ Aquila and E ag le ∈ RedListS pecies, by extensionality we can con-
clude that Aquila ∈ RedListS pecies. Instead, in ALC Ω (without extensionality) the
concepts E ag le and Aquila may be interpreted as different sets in the models of the
knowledge base (i.e., E ag leI 6= AquilaI ), although they have the same elements. In
this case, as we have seen in Section 3, Aquila ∈ RedListS pecies does not follow
from the knowledge base.
Further decidable existential fragments of set-theory have been studied, such as the
fragment with power-set and singleton operators [6,9], which opens the way to a set-
theoretic deﬁnition of other decidable extensions of ALC with well-founded sets. A nat-
ural question arising is whether these description logics with power-set, well-founded
sets and extensionality, can be translated as well into standard DLs and, in particular,
whether the extensionality and well-foundedness assumptions can be captured in stan-
dard DLs. We leave this investigation for future work.
Concerning the expressivity of ALC Ω with respect to standard DLs, the fact that
it has the ﬁnite model property already makes it evident that it cannot capture combi-
nations of constructs of expressive DLs which do not satisfy this property. On the one
hand, one can consider the problem of identifying a description logic (if any) having
the same expressivity as ALC Ω and, on the other hand, one can face the problem of ex-
tending other description logics (including expressive ones) with power-set and concept
membership.
For the ﬁrst point, it is not likely that the logic ALCOI can be translated into
ALC Ω . Indeed, while inverse roles can be encoded set-theoretically as in Section 5.1,
their encoding does not seem to be easily turned into a prenex universal formula so that,
with their addition, concept satisﬁability (w.r.t. a knowledge base) seems to fall outside
the existential fragment of Ω .
As regards extending expressive DLs with power-set and concept membership, we
observe that their encoding using nominals and an inverse role of ALCOI , can be ex-
ploited in any DL extending ALC and including the above mentioned constructs. The
proof of soundness of the translation of ALC Ω in ALCOI (Proposition 1) indeed gen-
eralizes to other DLs, when extended with the power-set construct and concept mem-
bership in a similar way. Instead, alternative techniques would be needed for proving
completeness of the translation for such logics, as the proof of Proposition 3 exploits
the ﬁnite model property of ALC Ω which, in general, is not a property of expressive
DLs.
There are other useful constructs which could be borrowed from set-theory and
added to ALC Ω . One of them is the unary union, S C , namely, the union of all the
subsets of concept C . This construct could be introduced in ALC Ω with the semantic
condition (S C )I = {x ∈ y | y ∈ C I }. Let us consider again Example 1.
Example 4. We may want to introduce an association ACME and state that all the mem-
bers of ACME participate to the SummerMeeting (in some group). Notice that, using

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

27

unary union, we can represent the set of all the participants to the SummerMeeting
as S SummerMeeting , We can state that all the members of ACME participate to the
summer meeting by the inclusion:
ACME ⊑ [ SummerMeeting
and that the members of ACME are all and the only participants to the summer meeting
by ACME ≡ S SummerMeeting .
ALC Ω can be easily extended with the construct of unary union S C . On the one hand,
this construct has a natural translation into ALCOI , by introducing, for each S C oc-
curring in the knowledge base K , a new concept name UC together with the axiom
UC ≡ ∃e− .C , and replacing all the occurrences of S C in K with UC . While the
proof of soundness in Proposition 1 extends to this case, alternative techniques would
be needed for proving completeness of the translation for the case with unary union, as
the proof of Proposition 3 exploits the ﬁnite model property of ALC Ω which we do not
expect to hold in this case. Adapting the encoding of ALC Ω into LCΩ is not immediate
and it might require a change in the encoding of the power-set concept as well. We leave
the study of this encoding for future investigation.
As we will see in the next section, a weakness of ALC Ω with respect to other ex-
tensions of description logics dealing with metamodeling, is that ALC Ω does not al-
low roles as instances of concepts. For instance, one could want to deﬁne a concept
Relatives including the roles hasParent , hasCusin , hasSibling , etc. and, in the for-
malisms admitting roles as elements of concepts, such as those in [25,23], one can in-
deed state that hasParent ∈ Relatives , hasCusin ∈ Relatives , hasSibling ∈ Relatives .
This is not possible in ALC Ω . The encoding of ALC Ω into LC Ω in Section 5.3, that
associates a concept Ui with each role Ri , might suggest a possible translation of mem-
bership axioms Ri ∈ C into LC Ω as Ui ∈ C . Indeed, each element u ∈ Ui represents
a set of pairs (y , z ) of domain elements such that z ∈ u ∈ y and, therefore, (y , z ) ∈ Ri .
The feasibility of such an extension and the study of a possible translation of such mem-
bership relations into standard description logics are left for future work.

7 Related work

The power-set construct allows to capture in a very natural way the interactions between
concepts and metaconcepts, adding to the language of ALC the expressivity of meta-
modelling. The issue of metamodelling has been analysed by Motik [25], who proved
that metamodelling in ALC -Full is already undecidable due to the free mixing of logi-
cal and metalogical symbols. Two decidable semantics, a contextual π semantics and a
Hilog ν -semantics, are introduced in [25] for a language extending SHOIQ with meta-
modelling, where concept names, role names and individual names are not disjoint. The
possibility of using the same name in different contexts is introduced in OWL 1.1 and
then in OWL 2 through punning7. As a difference, in this paper, we consider concept
names, role names and individual names to be disjoint, we allow concepts (and not only

7 https://www.w3.org/2007/OWL/wiki/Punning

28

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

concept names) to be instances of other concepts, by membership axioms, while we do
not allow role names as instances.

As in [25], DeGiacomo et al. [11] and Homola et al. [19] employ an Hilog-style
semantics to deﬁne Hi (SHIQ) and T H(SROIQ), respectively. While [25] and [11]
deﬁne untyped higher-order languages which, as ALC Ω , allow a concept to be an in-
stance of itself, [19] deﬁnes a typed higher-order extension of SROIQ allowing for
a hierarchy of concepts, where concept names of order t can only occur as instances
of concepts of order t + 1. In T H(SROIQ) [19] there is a strict separation between
concepts and roles (as in ALC Ω ) and decidability is proved by a polynomial ﬁrst-order
reduction into SROIQ, which generalizes the reduction in [15] to an arbitrary num-
ber of orders. The translation in [19] introduces axioms A′ ≡ ∃instanceOf .{cA′ }, for
each concept name A′ , axioms which are quite similar to our axiom (1), that we need
for the concepts C occurring in the knowledge base on the left hand side of membership
axioms.
In Hi (SHIQ) [11], complex concept and role expressions can occur as instances
of other concepts as in ALC Ω . A polynomial translation of Hi (SHIQ) into SHIQ is
deﬁned and a study of the complexity of higher-order query answering is provided.

Kubincova et al. in [22] propose a Hylog-style semantics, dropping the ordering
requirement in [19] and allowing the instanceOf role, with a ﬁxed interpretation, to
be used in axioms as any other role. The interpretation of role instanceOf does not
correspond exactly to the interpretation of e− in our translation, as we do not introduce
axiom (1) for all the concept names in NC , while we introduce it for all the concepts
occurring as instances in some membership axiom. In [23] Kubincova et al. deﬁne the
description logic HIR(SROIQ), an extension of SROIQ with an HiLog-style se-
mantics, which maintains basic separation between individuals, concepts, and roles, but
allows for meta concepts and meta roles which are promiscuous (they can classify/relate
any entities). The logic features a ﬁxedly interpreted instanceOf role, modeling the in-
stantiation relation.

Pan et al. in [28] and Motz et al. in [26] deﬁne extensions of OWL DL and of
SHIQ (respectively), based on semantics interpreting concepts as well-founded sets. In
particular, [26] adds to SHIQ meta-modelling axioms equating individuals to concepts,
without requiring that the instances of a concept need to stay in the same layer, and
develop a tableau algorithm as an extension of the one for SHIQ.
In [16] Gu introduces the language Hi(Horn-SROIQ), an extension of Horn-SROIQ
which allows classes and roles to be used as individuals based on the ν -semantics [25].
ν -satisﬁability and conjunctive query answering are shown to be reducible to the corre-
sponding problems in Horn-SROIQ.
Badea in [3] ﬁrst suggested a way of representing the power-set in a reiﬁed ALCO∈ ,
using the universal restriction and two roles ∈ and ∋. [3] does not consider an higher-
order semantics, but interprets “quantiﬁed concept variables as ranging over (explicitly
given) reiﬁed individuals”, and develops a calculus for checking consistency in reiﬁed
ALCO∈ . As a difference, here we show that a semantics quantifying over a transitive
set in the universe of an Ω -model can be mapped to standard DLs.
A set-theoretic approach in DLs has been adopted by Cantone et al. in [7] for deter-
mining the decidability of higher order conjunctive query answering in the description

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

29

logic DL4,×
D (where concept and role variables may occur in queries), as well as for
developing a tableau based procedure for dealing with several well-known ABox rea-
soning tasks.

8 Conclusions

In this paper we have shown that the similarities between Description Logics and Set
Theory can be exploited to introduce in DLs the new power-set construct and to allow
for (possibly circular) membership relationships among arbitrary concepts. We started
from the description logic ALC Ω—combining ALC with the set theory Ω—whose
interpretation domains are fragments of the domains of Ω -models. ALC Ω allows mem-
bership axioms among concepts as well as the power-set construct which, apart from [3],
has not been considered for description logics before. We show that an ALC Ω knowl-
edge base can be polynomially translated into an ALCOI knowledge base, providing,
besides decidability, an EX PT IME upper bound for satisﬁability in ALC Ω . We also de-
velop a set-theoretic translation for the description logic ALC Ω into the set theory Ω
exploiting a technique, originally proposed in [10], for translating normal modal and
polymodal logics into Ω . The translation has been deﬁned step by step, ﬁrst deﬁning
a set-theoretic translation for ALC with empty ABox, then for LC Ω , the fragment of
ALC Ω without role names and individual names and, ﬁnally, providing an encoding of
ALC Ω into LC Ω . The paper extends the preliminary results in [13] and [14], which do
not consider a set-theoretic encoding of role assertions and role membership axioms,
and exploit a slightly stronger semantics.
The set-theoretic translation, on the one hand, clariﬁes the nature of the power-set
concept (which indeed corresponds to the set-theoretic power-set, provided the valu-
ation of inclusions is restricted to the set corresponding to the domain ∆) and, on the
other hand, shows that the fragment of LC Ω without roles and individual names is as ex-
pressive as ALC Ω . The correspondence among fragments of set theory and description
logics may open to the possibility of transferring proof methods or decidability results
across the two formalisms.
The set-theoretic translation of ALC Ω can be extended to constructs of more ex-
pressive DLs, and this approach suggests a way to incorporate the power-set construct
in more expressive DLs. As the proof techniques used in this paper exploit the ﬁnite
model property of ALC Ω , alternative techniques will be needed to deal with more ex-
pressive DLs. Other possible directions of future investigation are, as mentioned above,
the study of variants of ALC Ω semantics with well-foundedness and extensionality
(and, speciﬁcally, of their translation to DLs) and the treatment of roles as individuals,
which has not been considered as an option in ALC Ω .

Acknowledgement: This research is partially supported by INDAM-GNCS Project
2019 ”METALLIC #2: METodi di prova per il ragionamento Automatico per Logiche
non-cLassIChe”

References

1. P. Aczel. Non-Well-Founded Sets, volume 14. CSLI Lecture Notes, Stanford, CA, 1988.

30

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

2. F. Baader, D. Calvanese, D.L. McGuinness, D. Nardi, and P.F. Patel-Schneider. The Descrip-
tion Logic Handbook - Theory, Implementation, and Applications. Cambridge, 2007.
3. L. Badea. Reifying concepts in description logics. In Proc. 15th Int. Joint Conf. on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, IJCAI 97, Nagoya, Japan, August 23-29, 1997, pages 142–149, 1997.
4. P. Blackburn, M. de Rijke, and Y. Venema. Modal Logic, volume 53 of Cambridge Tracts in
Theoretical Computer Science. Cambridge University Press, 2001.
5. P. Blackburn, M. de Rijke, and Y. Venema. Modal Logic. Cambridge University Press, 2001.
6. D. Cantone. Decision procedures for elementary sublanguages of set theory. X. Multilevel
syllogistic extended by the singleton and powerset operators. J. Autom. Reasoning, 7(2):193–
230, June 1991.
7. D. Cantone, M. Nicolosi Asmundo, and D.F. Santamaria. A set-theoretic approach to abox
reasoning services.
In Proc. Int. Joint Conf. on Rules and Reasoning, RuleML+RR 2017,
London, UK, July 12-15, pages 87–102, 2017.
8. D. Cantone, A. Ferro, and J. T. Schwartz. Decision procedures for elementary sublanguages
of set theory. VI. Multilevel syllogistic extended by the powerset operator. Commun. Pure
Appl. Math., 38(1):549–571, 1985.
9. D. Cantone, E. G. Omodeo, and P. Ursino. Formative processes with applications to the
decision problem in set theory: I. Powerset and singleton operators. Information and Com-
putation, 172(2):165–201, January 2002.
10. G. D’Agostino, A. Montanari, and A. Policriti. A set-theoretic translation method for poly-
modal logics. J. Autom. Reasoning, 15(3):317–337, 1995.
11. G. De Giacomo, M. Lenzerini, and R. Rosati. Higher-order description logics for domain
metamodeling. In Proc. AAAI 2011, San Francisco, California, USA, August 7-11, 2011.
12. G. Gargov, S. Passy, and T. Tinchev. Modal environment for Boolean speculations.
Mathematical Logic and Its Applications, pages 253–263. Plenum Press, 1987.
13. L. Giordano and A. Policriti. Power(Set) ALC. In ICTCS, 19th Italian Conference on Theo-
retical Computer Science, Urbino, Italy, 18-20 September 2018.
14. L. Giordano and A. Policriti. Extending ALC with the Power-Set Construct. In JELIA, 16th
European Conference on Logics in Artiﬁcial Intelligence , Rende, Italy, May 7-10 2019.
15. B. Glimm, S. Rudolph, and J. V ¨olker. Integrated metamodeling and diagnosis in OWL 2. In
ISWC 2010, Shanghai, China, November 7-11, 2010, pages 257–272, 2010.
16. Z. Gu. Meta-modeling extension of horn-sroiq and query answering. In Proceedings of the
29th Int. Workshop on Description Logics, Cape Town, South Africa, April 22-25, 2016.
17. Paul Halmos. Naive Set Theory. Van Nostrand, 1960.
18. J. Hladik. A tableau system for the description logic S HIO . In Contributions to the Doc-
toral Programme of IJCAR 2004, volume 106 of CEUR Workshop Proc., pages 21–25, 2004.
19. M. Homola, J. Kluka, V. Sv ´atek, and M. Vacura. Typed higher-order variant of SROIQ - why
not? In Proc. 27th Int. Workshop on Description Logics, Vienna, Austria, July 17-20, pages
567–578, 2014.
20. I. Horrocks and P.F. Patel-Schneider. A Proposal for an OWL Rule Language. In Proc.WWW
2004. ACM, 2004.
21. T. Jech. Set Theory. Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidel-
berg, Third Millennium edition, 2003.
22. P. Kubincov ´a, J. Kluka, and M. Homola. Towards expressive metamodelling with instantia-
tion. In Proc. of the 28th Int. Workshop on Description Logics, Athens, June 7-10, 2015.
23. P. Kubincov ´a, J. Kluka, and M. Homola. Expressive description logic with instantiation
metamodelling. In Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning: Proc. 15th Int.
Conf., KR 2016, Cape Town, South Africa, April 25-29, 2016., pages 569–572, 2016.
24. C. Lutz and U. Sattler. The complexity of reasoning with Boolean modal logics. In Proc.
3rd Int. Conf. on Advances in Modal Logic (AiML 2000), pages 329–348, 2002.

In

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

31

25. B. Motik. On the properties of metamodeling in OWL. In Proc. ISWC 2005, 4th International
Semantic Web Conference, Galway, Ireland, November 6-10, 2005, pages 548–562, 2005.
26. R. Motz, E. Rohrer, and P. Severi. The description logic SHIQ with a ﬂexible meta-modelling
hierarchy. J. Web Sem., 35:214–234, 2015.
27. E.G. Omodeo, A. Policriti, and A.I. Tomescu. On Sets and Graphs. Perspectives on Logic
and Combinatorics. Springer, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54981-1, 2017.
28. J.Z. Pan, I. Horrocks, and G Schreiber. OWL FA: A metamodeling extension of OWL DL.
In Proc.OWLED 2005 Workshop, Galway, Ireland, November 11-12, 2005.
29. P.F. Patel-Schneider, P.H. Hayes, and I. Horrocks. OWL Web Ontology Language; Semantics
and Abstract Syntax. In http: //www.w3.org/TR/owl-semantics/, 2002.
30. K. Schild. A correspondence theory for terminological logics: Preliminary report. In Pro-
ceedings IJCAI 1991, Sydney, Australia, August 24-30, 1991, pages 466–471, 1991.
31. C. Welty and D. Ferrucci. What’s in an instance? Technical Report 94-18, Max-Plank-Institut,
1994, RPI computer Science, 1994.

Appendix

Proposition 1 (Soundness of the translation) The translation of an ALC Ω knowledge
base K = (T , A) into ALCOI is sound, that is, for any query F :

K T |=ALCOI F T ⇒ K |=ALCΩ F.

Proof. By contraposition, assume K 6|=ALCΩ F and let I = h∆, ·I i be a model of K
in ALC Ω that falsiﬁes F . ∆ is a transitive set living in a model of Ω with universe U .
We build an ALCOI interpretation I ′ = h∆′ , ·I ′
i, which is going to be a model of
K T falsifying F in ALCOI , by letting:

- ∆′ = ∆;

- for all B ∈ NC , B I ′
- for all roles R ∈ NR , RI ′

= B I ;
= RI ;
- for all x, y ∈ ∆′ , (x, y ) ∈ eI ′

if and only if y ∈ x;
- for all (standard) individual name a ∈ NI , aI ′

= aI ∈ A

32

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

For the base case, the property above holds for C = ⊤ and C = ⊥, as ⊤T = ⊤ and
⊥T = ⊥, and it also holds by construction for all concept names B ∈ NC .
For the inductive step, let C = C1 ⊓ C2 and let x ∈ ((C1 ⊓ C2 )T )I ′
,
for some x ∈ ∆′ . As I ′ is an ALCOI interpretation, x ∈ (C T
and
since by induction (8) holds for concepts C1 and C2 , we have x ∈ C I
1 and x ∈ C I
2 .
Therefore, x ∈ (C I

= (C T
1 ⊓ C T
and x ∈ (C T

1

1 )I ′

2 )I ′
2 )I ′

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

33

C , x) ∈ eI ′

interpretation I ′ , (eI ′
if and only if x ∈ eI ′
C . But x ∈ eI ′
C immediately follows
from the previous conclusions that x ∈ C I , as eI ′
C = C I by construction. The vice-versa
can be proved similarly.
To conclude the proof, it can be easily shown that, for any query F , F T is satisﬁed
in I ′ if and only if F is satisﬁed in I .

✷

Proposition 3 (Completeness of the translation) The translation of an ALC Ω knowl-
edge base K = (T , A) into ALCOI is complete, that is, for any query F :

K |=ALCΩ F ⇒ K T |=ALCOI F T .

Proof. We prove the completeness of the translation by contraposition. Let K T 6|=ALCOI
F T . Then there is a model I = h∆, ·I i of K T in ALCOI such that I falsiﬁes F . We
show that we can build a model J = hΛ, ·J i of K in ALC Ω , where the domain Λ is a
transitive set in the universe HF1/2 (A) consisting of all the hereditarily ﬁnite rational
hypersets built from atoms in A = {a0 , a1 , . . .}. As a matter of fact, the domain Λ is
to be extended possibly duplicating sets representing extensionally equal but pairwise
distinct sets/elements in ∆.
We deﬁne Λ starting from the graph8 G = h∆, eI i, whose nodes are the elements
of ∆ and whose arcs are the pairs (x, y ) ∈ eI . Notice that, by Proposition 2, the graph
G can be assumed to be ﬁnite. Intuitively, an arc from x to y in G stands for the fact
that y ∈ x.
At this point, let ∆0 = {d1 , . . . , dm} be the elements of ∆ which, in the model
I = h∆, ·I i, are not in relation eI with any other element in ∆ and are non equal to the
interpretation of any concept individual name eC (that is, dj ∈ ∆0 iff there is no y such
that (dj , y ) ∈ eI and there is no concept C such that dj = eI
C ). For any given d ∈ ∆
we deﬁne the following hyperset M (d):

M (d) = (cid:26) ak
if d = dk ∈ ∆0 ,
(cid:8)M (d′ ) | (d, d′ ) ∈ eI (cid:9) otherwise.

(9)

Observe that, for the concepts C occurring on the l.h.s. of membership axioms, as ax-
iom C T = ∃e− .{eC } is satisﬁed in the model I of K T , it holds that d′ ∈ (C T )I iff
C , d′ ) ∈ eI . Therefore, for d = eI

C , M (d) = M (eI
C ) = (cid:8)M (d′ ) | (eI
C , d′ ) ∈ eI (cid:9)

(eI
= (cid:8)M (d′ ) | d′ ∈ (C T )I (cid:9).

The above deﬁnition uniquely determines hypersets in HF1/2 (A). This follows from
the fact that all ﬁnite systems of (ﬁnite) set-theoretic equations have a solution in

HF1/2 (A)9 .

8 Strictly speaking the graph G introduced here is not really necessary: it is just mentioned to
single out the membership relation ∈ from eI more clearly.
9 More generally, when eI is a well-founded relation, M (·) is a set-theoretic “rendering” of
eI : the so-called Mostowski collapse of eI (see [21]). As a consequence of the duplication of
extensionally equal sets, not only we have the trivial property that, for d, d′ ∈ ∆, d = d′
implies M (d) = M (d′ ), but also the converse implication, i.e., M (d) = M (d′ ) implies
d = d′ .

34

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

Our task now is to complete the deﬁnition of J = hΛ, ·J i in such a way to prove
that J is a model of K in ALC Ω falsifying F . The deﬁnition is completed as follows:

- Λ = {M (d) | d ∈ ∆};
- for all B ∈ NC , B J = {M (d) | d ∈ B I };
- for all roles R ∈ NR such that R 6= e, RJ = {(M (d), M (d′ )) | (d, d′ ) ∈ RI };

- for all standard named individuals a ∈ NI such that aI = dk , let aJ = M (dk ) =

ak ∈ A.

By construction, Λ is transitive set in a model M of Ω (in fact, for all M (d) ∈ Λ, if
M (d′ ) ∈ M (d), then (d′ , d) ∈ eI and then d′ ∈ ∆; therefore, M (d′ ) ∈ Λ). We can
now prove, by induction on the structural complexity of concepts, that the following
holds, for all x ∈ ∆:

M (x) ∈ C J if and only if x ∈ (C T )I .

(10)

The base case for concept names, ⊤, and ⊥ is trivial, as ⊤T = ⊤, and ⊥T = ⊥.
For the case C = B ∈ NC , by deﬁnition of J , M (x) ∈ B J iff x ∈ B I . As B T = B ,

M (x) ∈ B J iff x ∈ (B T )I .

1 and M (x) ∈ C J

The inductive step in case C = C1 ⊓ C2 follows directly from the inductive hy-
pothesis. If M (x) ∈ (C1 ⊓ C2 )J , then M (x) ∈ C J
2 . By inductive
hypothesis, x ∈ (C T
1 )I and x ∈ (C T
2 )I . Hence, x ∈ ((C1 ⊓ C2 )T )I . The vice-versa is
proved similarly.
The cases in which C = (∃R.D) or C = (∀R.D), are also straightforward. We
only consider the case C = (∃R.D). If M (x) ∈ (∃R.D)J , then there is a M (d) ∈ Λ
such that: (M (x), M (d)) ∈ RJ and M (d) ∈ DJ . By inductive hypothesis, d ∈ (DT )I
and, by deﬁnition of J , (x, d) ∈ RI . Hence, x ∈ ((∃R.D)T )I . The vice-versa is proved
similarly.
For the case C = Pow(D), by deﬁnition of translation, we have that:

(C T )I = ((Pow(D))T )I = (∀e.DT )I = {x ∈ ∆ | ∀y ((x, y ) ∈ eI → y ∈ (DT )I }

and C J = (Pow(D))J = Pow (DJ )

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

35

(10), M (eI
C ) ∈ DJ . As we have seen above, M (eI
again from (10), M (eI
C ) = C J . Thus C J ∈ DJ .
For each role membership axiom (C, D) ∈ R in K , we show that (C J , DJ ) ∈ RJ .
As the assertion R(eC , eD ) is in K T and is satisﬁed in I , we have (eI
Hence, from the deﬁnition of RJ , (M (eI
D )) ∈ RJ . As we have seen above,
C ) = (cid:8)M (d′ ) | d′ ∈ (C T )I (cid:9) and, from (10), M (eI
C ) = C J . Similarly, M (eI
DJ . Thus (C J , DJ ) ∈ RJ .

C ) = (cid:8)M (d′ ) | d′ ∈ (C T )I (cid:9) and,
C , eI
D ) ∈ RI .

C ), M (eI

M (eI

D ) =

✷

Proposition 6 (Soundness and Completeness of the translation of LC Ω )
For all concepts C and D on the language of the knowledge base K :

K |=LCΩ C ⊑ D if and only if

Ω |= ∀x(T rans(x) → ∀x1 , . . . , ∀xn (^ ABox A ∧ ^ TBox T → C S

36

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

β and w ⊆ ∆ (by inductive hypothesis)
(by transitivity of ∆, as w ∈ ∆)

iff w ⊆ (DS )M
iff w ⊆ (DS )M
iff w ∈ (P ow(DS ))M
iff w ∈ ((Pow(D))S )M

β

β

β

The equivalence (11) can be used to prove that the ALC Ω interpretation I is a model
of K , i.e. it satisﬁes all axiom inclusions and membership inclusions in K , and that I
falsiﬁes the inclusion C ⊑ D . From this, it follows that, K 6|=ALCΩ C ⊑ D . We prove
that I is a model of K .
For inclusion axioms, let C ⊑ D in K , we show that, for all w ∈ ∆, if w ∈ C I
then w ∈ DI . The inclusion C S

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

37

iff d ⊆ (DS )M
iff d ∈ (P ow(DS ))M
iff d ∈ ((Pow(D))S )M

β and d ⊆ ∆, by inductive hypothesis
β , by transitivity of ∆, as d ∈ ∆
β , by the translation of the power-set.
Property (13) can be used to prove that the formula (12) is falsiﬁed in the model M
of Ω . It is enough to prove that: (V ABox A ∧ V TBox T )β is satisﬁed in M and that

(C S

38

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

Our task now is to complete the deﬁnition of J = h∆′ , ·J i in such a way to prove
that J is a model of K E in LC Ω falsifying F E . The deﬁnition is completed as follows:

- ∆′ = Λ;

- AJ = {M (d) | d ∈ AI } for all A ∈ NC , in the language of ALC Ω ;
- B J
- U J

i = M (aI
i ) = π(aI
i ), i = 1, . . . , r;
i = {M (ui
s,t) | s, t ∈ ∆ and (s, t) ∈ RI
- (F i
h,j )J = M (ui
);
- (Gi

aI
h ,aI
Ch ,Cj )J = M (ui

i };

j

s,t), for s = C I
h and t = C I
j .
By construction, ∆′ is transitive set in a model M of Ω . Notice that B J
i ) ∈ A,
and hence B J
i has no elements. Notice also that, in the deﬁnition of (Gi
Ch ,Cj )J , s and
t are elements of ∆ and (s, t) ∈ RI
i , so that ui
s,t ∈ E . In fact, s = C I
h and t = C I
j and
Ri (Ch , Cj ) is in A. Therefore, as I satisﬁes the ABox A, (C I
i ⊆ ∆×∆, and
j ∈ ∆. In the following, we let M (Di ) = {M (ui
i }.
It can be shown that, for all d ∈ ∆, for all concepts C in K (or F ),

h , C I
j ) ∈ RI
s,t) | s, t ∈ ∆ and (s, t) ∈ RI

i = M (aI

C I
h , C I

d ∈ C I if and only if M (d) ∈ (C E )J ,

(14)

We prove ( 14) by induction on the structural complexity of concepts. Let d ∈ ∆. We
consider the cases of named concepts and the power-set concept.

Let C ′ = Ai , for some Ai ∈ NC .

M (d) ∈ (AE
i )J iff M (d) ∈ AJ

i (by the encoding for named concepts, AE
i = Ai )
iff d ∈ AI
i (by deﬁnition of AJ
i )

Let C ′ = Pow(C ).

M (d) ∈ ((Pow(C ))E )J iff

iff M (d) ∈ (Pow(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ⊔ C E ))J (by the encoding E )

iff M (d) ∈ P ow((U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ⊔ C E )J )

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

39

M (d) ∈ ((∀Ri .C )E )J iff

iff M (d) ∈ (Pow(¬Ui ⊔ Pow(C E )))J (by the encoding E )

iff M (d) ∈ P ow((¬Ui ⊔ Pow(C E ))J )

40

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

U J

M (ui

ui
U J

Ch ,Cj )J ∈ (C E

Ch ,Cj )J and (Gi
Ch ,Cj )J ∈

j )J ∈ (Gi
h , C I
j ) ∈ RI
s,t ), (ui
s,t) ∈ M (s) and M (t) ∈

are satisﬁed in J , that is: (Gi
h )J , (C E
i . As assertion Ri (Ch , Cj ) is satisﬁed in I , that is (C I
i . By construction of
E there is ui
s,t ∈ Di ⊆ N such that s = C I
h and t = C I
j , with (s, ui
s,t , t) ∈ E . By
deﬁnition of the model J , (Gi
s,t ). Also, M (ui
s,t ) hold in J . Replacing s and t with their deﬁnitions and M (ui
s,t) with (Gi
we get: (Gi
h ) and M (C I
Ch ,Cj )J . Finally, by construction,
s,t ∈ Di , and U J
i . Therefore, (Gi
i .
It is easy to see that the axioms Ai ⊑ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ), Bi ∈ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ),

j ) ∈ (Gi
i = M (Di ), than M (ui
s,t) ∈ M (Di ) = U J

Ch ,Cj )J ∈ M (C I

Ch ,Cj )J = M (ui

Ch ,Cj )J ∈

Ch ,Cj )J

C E ∈ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ), and axiom ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ) ⊑ Pow(¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ) ⊔

Pow(¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ))) are all satisﬁed in J by construction.

In a similar way, we can prove that F is falsiﬁed in I , considering the different cases
for F , and given the hypothesis that F E is falsiﬁed by J .

(⇒) We sketch the proof of completeness. The proof is by contraposition. Assume
that K E 6|=LCΩ F E , then, there is an LCΩ model J = (∆, ·J ) of K E such that F E is
falsiﬁed in J .
For the ﬁnite model property of LC Ω (which is a fragment of ALC Ω ), we can as-
sume without loss of generality that the model J is ﬁnite. We build from J an ALC Ω
model I = (∆′ , ·I ) of K which falsiﬁes F , deﬁning ∆′ as a transitive set in the universe
HF1/2 (A) consisting of all the hereditarily ﬁnite rational hypersets built from atoms in

A = {a0 , a1 , . . .}.

We start from the graph G = (N , E ), with nodes N = ∆\(U J
arcs are deﬁned as follows: E = {(d1 , d2 ) | d1 , d2 ∈ N ∧ d2 ∈ d1}.
G is ﬁnite. Observe that, for each ai in K , B J
Similarly, for each Ai in K , AJ
We deﬁne an injection π from the leaves of N (i.e. nodes without any successor)
plus the elements B I
r ∈ N to A. For any given d ∈ N , we deﬁne the following
hyperset M (d):

i ∈ N , by axiom Bi ∈ ¬(U1 ⊔. . .⊔Uk ).
i ⊆ N , by axiom Ai ⊑ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ).

1 ∪ . . . ∪ U J

1 , . . . , B I

k ), whose

M (d) = (cid:26) π(d)
{M (d′ ) | (d, d′ ) ∈ E } otherwise.

if d is a leaf of N or d = B J
j for some j ,

(15)

The above deﬁnition uniquely determines hypersets in HF1/2 (A). This follows from the
fact that all ﬁnite systems of (ﬁnite) set-theoretic equations have a solution in HF1/2 (A).
∆′ = {M (d) | d ∈ N }, possibly extended by duplicating M(d)’s to represent
extensionally-equal (bisimilar) sets corresponding to pairwise distinct elements in N .
We have to complete the deﬁnition of I = h∆′ , ·I i in such a way to prove that I is a
model of K in ALC Ω falsifying F . The deﬁnition is completed as follows:

- AI = {M (d) | M (d) ∈ ∆′ ∧ d ∈ AJ }, for all A ∈ NC ;
i = {(M (d), M (d′ )) | M (d), M (d′ ) ∈ ∆′ ∧ ∃u ∈ U J
i (u ∈ d ∧ d′ ∈ u)},

- RI
for all roles Ri occurring in K ; RI
i = ∅ for all other roles R ∈ NR ;
- aI
i ) for all named individuals ai occurring in K ;
1 ) for all other a ∈ NI .

i = M (B J
i ) = π(B J
aI = M (B J

Adding the Power-Set to Description Logics

41

By construction, ∆′ is a transitive set in a model M of Ω . As AJ ⊆ ∆\(U J
k ),
i ⊆ ∆′ . To complete the proof it can be shown that, for all M (d) ∈ ∆′ , and C in K
(or in F ):

1 ∪ . . . ∪ U J

AI

M (d) ∈ C I if and only if d ∈ (C E )J

(16)

which can be used to prove that J is a model of K that falsiﬁes F .
We prove ( 16) by induction on the structural complexity of concepts. Let M (d) ∈
∆′ . We consider the cases of named concepts, the power-set concept and the universal
restriction.

Let C ′ = Ai , for some Ai ∈ NC .
i iff d ∈ AJ
i (by deﬁnition of AI
i )
i )J (as AE
i = Ai )

M (d) ∈ AI
iff d ∈ (AE

Let C ′ = Pow(C ).

d ∈ ((Pow(C ))E )J iff

iff d ∈ (Pow(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ⊔ C E ))J (by the encoding E )

iff d ∈ P ow((U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ⊔ C E )J )

42

Laura Giordano and Alberto Policriti

The equivalence (16) can be used to prove that I is a model of K that falsiﬁes F ,
thus showing that K 6|=ALCΩ F .
Let us prove that I is a model of K .
For the inclusion axioms, let C ⊑ D be in K . Then C E ⊓ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ) ⊑ DE
is in K E , and is satisﬁed in J , that is, for all d ∈ ∆, if d ∈ (C E )J and d 6∈ U J
(for
all j = 1, k ), then d ∈ (DE )J . Let M (d) ∈ C I . By (16), d ∈ (C E )J and, as d ∈ N ,
i (for all j = 1, k ). Hence, d ∈ (DE )J . Again by (16), M (d) ∈ DI .
For the membership axioms, let C ∈ D in K . The membership axioms C E ∈ DE
and C E ∈ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ) are in K E and are satisﬁed in J . i.e., (C E )J ∈ (DE )J and
(C E )J 6∈ (U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk )J . Thus (C E )J ∈ N and, by (16), M ((C E )J ) ∈ DI . Again

d 6∈ U J

i

by (16), C I = {M (d) | d ∈ (C E )J } = M (C E )J ), thus C I ∈ DI .

i ∈ ¬(U1 ⊔

j

j ),

h,j )J ∈ U J

h,j )J ∈ B J

j ∈ (F i

h , aI
j ) ∈ RI

h ∈ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk )J ) and B J
j ∈ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk )J ) ) we
h ), M (B J
j )) ∈ RI
i = M (B J
j = M (B J
h , aI
j )) ∈ RI

i . By deﬁnition of I , aI

i ) and aI

For each assertion C (ai ) in K , the membership axiom aE
I ∈ C E is in K E . There-
fore, (aE
i )J ∈ (C E )J . By deﬁnition of the encoding, B J
i ∈ (C E )J and B J
. . . ⊔ Uk )J . Thus, B J
i ∈ N . By (16), M (B J
i ) ∈ C I . Hence, aI
i ∈ C I (by deﬁnition of
the interpretation of ai in I ).
For each assertion Ri (ah , aj ) in K , we have to show that (aI
i . The
membership axioms F i
h,j ∈ Bh , Bj ∈ F i
h,j and F i
h,j ∈ Ui are in K E , and are satisﬁed
in J . Thus, (F i
h , B J
h,j )J and (F i
i . Let d = (F i
h,j )J ∈ ∆.
Given that d ∈ U J
i , from d ∈ B J
h and B J
j ∈ d, by deﬁnition of RI
i , and B J
h and B J
are in N (by axioms B J
have (M (B J
therefore: (aI
i .
For each assertion Ri (Ch , Cj ) in K , we have to show that (C I
i . The
membership axioms Gi
h , C E
and Gi
Ch ,Cj ∈ Ui are in K E , and
are satisﬁed in J . Thus, (Gi
h )J , (C E
i . Let d = (Gi
Ch ,Cj )J ∈ ∆. Given that d ∈ U J
i , from d ∈ (C E
h )J and (C E
As C E
and, by deﬁnition of RI
i . By (16), C I
h )J , and similarly C I
j )J . Hence, (C I
In a similar way, we can prove that F is falsiﬁed in I , considering the different cases
for F , and given the hypothesis that F E is falsiﬁed by J .

j )J ∈ d.
h ∈ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ). and C E
j ∈ ¬(U1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Uk ) are in K E , (C E
h )J , (C E
j )J inN
i , (M ((C E
h )J ), M ((C E
j )J )) ∈ RI
h = {M (d) | d ∈
j = M (C E
h , C I
j )) ∈ RI

Ch ,Cj ∈ C E
Ch ,Cj )J ∈ (C E

Ch ,Cj )J and (Gi
Ch ,Cj )J ∈

(C E
h )J } = M (C E

h , C I
j ) ∈ RI

j ∈ Gi

Ch ,Cj

j )J ∈ (Gi

i .

✷

U J

