An End-to-End Audio Classiﬁcation System based on Raw Waveforms and
Mix-Training Strategy

Jiaxu Chen*, Jing Hao*, Kai Chen, Di Xie, Shicai Yang, Shiliang Pu

Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China

{chenjiaxu, haojing, xiedi, yangshicai, pushiliang}@hikvision.com

9
1
0
2

v
o

N

1
2

]

S

A

.

s
s

e
e

[

1
v
9
4
3
9
0

.

1
1
9
1

:

v

i

X

r

a

Abstract

Audio classiﬁcation can distinguish different kinds of sounds,
which is helpful for intelligent applications in daily life. How-
ever, it remains a challenging task since the sound events in
an audio clip is probably multiple, even overlapping. This pa-
per introduces an end-to-end audio classiﬁcation system based
on raw waveforms and mix-training strategy. Compared to
human-designed features which have been widely used in ex-
isting research, raw waveforms contain more complete infor-
mation and are more appropriate for multi-label classiﬁcation.
Taking raw waveforms as input, our network consists of two
variants of ResNet structure which can learn a discriminative
representation. To explore the information in intermediate lay-
ers, a multi-level prediction with attention structure is applied in
our model. Furthermore, we design a mix-training strategy to
break the performance limitation caused by the amount of train-
ing data. Experiments show that the mean average precision of
the proposed audio classiﬁcation system on Audio Set dataset
is 37.2%. Without using extra training data, our system exceeds
the state-of-the-art multi-level attention model.
audio classiﬁcation,
raw waveforms, mix-
training strategy, Audio Set

Index Terms:

1. Introduction

Sound is an indispensable medium for information transmission
of the surrounding environment. When some sounds happen,
such as baby crying, glass breaking and so on, we usually expect
that we can “hear” the sounds immediately even if we are not
around. In this case, audio classiﬁcation which aims to predict
whether an acoustic event appears has gained great attention
in recent years.
It has many practical applications in remote
surveillance, home automation, and public security.
In real life, an audio clip usually contains multiple over-
lapping sounds, and the types of sounds are various, ranging
from natural soundscapes to human activities. It is challenging
to predict the presence or absence of audio events in the audio
clip. Audio Set [1] is a common large-scale dataset in this task,
which contains about two million multi-label audio clips cover-
ing 527 classes. Recently, some methods have been proposed
to learn audio tags on this dataset. Among them, a multi-level
attention model [2] achieved the state-of-the-art performance
based on [3], which outperforms Google’s baseline [4]. How-
ever, the shortcoming of these models is that the input signal is
the published bottleneck feature [4], which causes information
loss. Considering that the actual length of sound events is differ-
ent and the handcrafted features may throw away relevant infor-
mation at a short time scale, raw waveforms containing richer
information is a better choice for multi-label classiﬁcation. In
audio tagging task of DCASE 2017, 2018 challenge [5], some

*These ﬁrst two authors contribute equally to this work.

works [6,7] combined handcrafted features with raw waveforms
as input signals on a small dataset consisting of 17 or 41 classes.
To our knowledge, none of the works proposes an end-to-end
network taking raw waveforms as input in Audio Set classiﬁca-
tion task.
In this paper, we propose a classiﬁcation system based on
two variants of ResNet [8] which directly extracts features from
raw waveforms. Firstly, we use a one-dimension (1D) ResNet
for feature extraction. Then, a two-dimension (2D) ResNet with
multi-level prediction and attention structure is used for classi-
ﬁcation. For obtaining better classiﬁcation performance further,
a mix-training strategy is implemented in our system. In this
training process, the network is trained with mixed data which
extends the training distribution, and then transferred to target
domain using raw data.
In this work, the main contributions are as follows:
1. A novel end-to-end Audio Set classiﬁcation system is
proposed. To the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst
time to take raw waveforms as input on Audio Set and
combine 1D ResNet with 2D ResNet for feature extrac-
tion at different time scales.
2. A mix-training strategy is introduced to effectively im-
prove the utilization of limited training data. Experi-
ments show that it is powerful in multi-label audio clas-
siﬁcation compared to the existing data augmentation
methods.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
2 presents related works. Section 3 introduces the proposed
network architecture and mix-training strategy. Section 4 shows
the experimental results and analysis. Finally, section 5 gives
the conclusion of this paper.

2. Related works

Deep learning has achieved success in audio classiﬁcation tasks.
The majority of these works [4, 9–11] classify the features de-
signed by humans, such as log-mel feature and MFCC. Re-
cently, some works learning the audio tags directly from the
raw waveforms present high performance. [12] proposed a time-
domain network based on the 1D raw waveform. The results
in [13, 14] demonstrated that the feature directly learned from
the raw waveform is sufﬁcient for audio classiﬁcation problems.
However, these works are designed specially for single-label
audio classiﬁcation. For multi-label classiﬁcation, we input raw
waveforms to a multi-level prediction with attention structure
which can perceive the sound at different time scales.
The lack of data is a crucial issue in audio classiﬁcation.
Meanwhile, tagging the sound events consumes amounts of
manpower. To address this problem, two kinds of approaches
have been proposed: one efﬁciently making use of limited data
[15–19] and the other based on additional data [3, 20, 21]. In the

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Architecture of the end-to-end audio classiﬁcation network. The raw waveform (1D vector) is the input signal. First, a 1D
ResNet is applied to extract audio features. Then, the features are transposed from C × 1 × T to 1 × C × T . Finally, a 2D ResNet
with multi-level prediction structure performs audio classiﬁcation. The output of the network has multiple labels and is the mean of the
multi-level prediction results. The Block is composed of n bottleneck blocks, where n is related to the number of layers in ResNet.

ﬁrst type of method, Takahashi et al. [15] mixed two different
sounds belonging to one class to extend the training distribu-
tion. Mixup [17] interpolated the training data and trained the
model to output the mixing ratio. However, these augmentation
methods are not suitable for a multi-label dataset, such as Audio
Set. In the second type, Kumar et al. [21] pre-trained the model
by an additional large audio dataset. Kong et al. [3] applied
the rich sound representation learned on YouTube-100M [4] to
classify Audio Set.
Different from all the approaches above, we propose a sim-
ple training strategy to alleviate the need of training data in au-
dio classiﬁcation tasks. Speciﬁcally, we train the network us-
ing both mixed data and raw data, and only focus on the event
categories other than the mixing ratio in audio clips. The pro-
posed method can be applied in both single-label and multi-
label audio classiﬁcation. What’s more, there is no requirement
of pre-training stage with an additional large dataset. The ex-
periments in Section 4 demonstrate the superiority of the pro-
posed training strategy. Our network trained with only Audio
Set presents a comparable performance to the state-of-the-art
method [2] which uses the extra knowledge of YouTube-100M.

3. Raw-waveforms-based network and
mix-training strategy

In this section, we describe the raw-waveforms-based end-to-
end network and mix-training strategy. Compared to hand-
crafted features, raw waveforms preserve more complete in-
formation of audio clips. Thus, we propose a novel network
based on two variants of ResNet structure, where feature extrac-
tion and classiﬁcation are jointly performed on raw waveforms.
Furthermore, training the end-to-end network with a novel mix-
training method yields better performance.

3.1. Raw-waveforms-based network

Figure 1 illustrates the detailed architecture of our network.
The network is split into two stages:
the top stage computes
frequency-like features and the bottom stage classiﬁes the ex-
tracted features.
The raw waveform, which can be represented as 1D vec-
tor, is the input signal of our network. At the top stage, a 1D
time-domain residual network, called 1D ResNet, is applied to
extract audio features. At the bottom stage, a 2D residual net-
work with multi-level prediction structure, called 2D ResNet,
performs audio classiﬁcation. As shown in Figure 1, the shape
of the output feature in the top stage is deﬁned as C × 1 × T ,
where C is the number of channels and T is the time dimension.
Speciﬁcally, the output feature is frequency-like and consists of
C features with a size of 1 × T . In order to convolve in both
time and frequency, we transpose the feature from C × 1 × T
to 1 × C × T and then input the 2D frequency-like map to 2D
ResNet. In the bottom stage, a multi-level prediction structure
is applied to make use of the information in intermediate lay-
ers, which can also prevent gradient vanishing. In this way, we
can obtain three prediction results after the 2th, 3th, 4th Block
respectively. In Figure 1, the basic unit of the Block is build-
ing block or bottleneck block, where the type and the number
of the units are determined by the number of layers in ResNet.
The overall optimization objective of the network is to minimize
the mean of multi-level prediction loss. Moreover, to quantify
the importance of audio segments containing audio events, we
adapt the attention structure [2] in the multi-level prediction. In
our work, the attention structure consists of two attention mod-
ules, where one is applied after Block and the other is applied
after the two fully connected (FC) layers following the Block.
Then, the two predictions of the attention modules are concate-
nated to a vector as the output of the attention structure.

Figure 2: Mix-training strategy. We ﬁrst train the network θ on mixed data ˜xk and then ﬁne-tune it to target domain θ (cid:48) using raw data
xn . xi , xj and xn are raw data randomly selected from Audio Set and ˜xk is the linear interpolation of audio clip pairs (xi , xj ) at a
random ratio α ∈ (0, 1).

3.2. Mix-training strategy

As is known, the performance of a network greatly depends on
the amount and quality of training data. A mix-training strategy
(see Figure 2) is introduced to improve the utilization of the
limited training set. It can be concluded as a two-step training
process: ﬁrst, the model parameter is optimized with the mixed
audio clips; then, we use the raw audio data to ﬁne-tune the
model parameter from θ to θ (cid:48) .
The sound collected from the real environment, such as the
sample in Audio Set, may contain more than one audio event.
Humans can distinguish such sounds. Therefore, mixing two
different audio clips to produce one new audio clip is a reason-
able data augmentation method. In the ﬁrst training step, we
train the proposed network on the mixed data. Let (xi , yi ) and
(xj , yj ) be a pair of randomly selected training samples in the

form of (raw wavef orm, label), and (˜xk , ˜yk ) be mixed data.

yi and yj are both multi-hot vectors composed of 0 and 1. A
multi-label audio clip can be seen as the mixture of multiple
single-label audio clips. Due to the nature of multi-label audio,
it’s difﬁcult to predict the mixing ratio when mixing two multi-
label audio clips. Thus, mixup [17] which predicts ratio label
˜yk = αyi +(1 − α) yj is not suitable for multi-label classiﬁca-
tion. Different from mixup, we train the network to output only
the event categories of mixed data. In our method, xi and xj
can contain multiple labels. The mixed training data (˜xk , ˜yk )
is generated as:

(1)

˜xk = αxi + (1 − α) xj
˜yk = sign (yi + yj )

(2)
where the mixed audio ˜xk is the linear interpolation of xi and
xj at a random ratio α ∈ (0, 1), and the corresponding label ˜yk
contains all the labels in xi and xj . sign (·) is the elementwise
operation that extracts the sign of each element of a vector.
Classifying the mixed audio can also be seen as a multi-
label classiﬁcation problem. Thus, we optimize the model pa-
rameter θ using sigmoid cross entropy loss:

(cid:88)

k,n

L = − 1
K

[(1 − ˜ykn ) log (1 − tkn ) + ˜ykn log tkn ]

(3)

tk = fθ (˜xk ) = [tk1 , tk2 , · · · , tkN ]

(4)
where tk is the prediction result of ˜xk , tkn and ˜ykn are the
predicted probability and real probability of event n happened
in ˜xk . K and N are the number of audio ﬁles and classes.
Mixing operation increases the variety of training data, and
thereby leads to better performance. However, the distribution

of the mixed data produced by linear interpolation is different
from that of the raw data. Owing to domain shift [22], the
model θ trained on the mixed data could not generalize per-
fectly to the original classiﬁcation task. The mixed data blend-
ing more events than raw data still keeps the characteristic of
audio. Therefore, the representation learned from the mixed
data can be transferred to the raw data. Through ﬁne-tuning the
trained model θ with the raw training data, we can transfer the
network to the original audio classiﬁcation task.

4. Experiments

4.1. Dataset

Audio Set [1] is a human-labeled dataset for audio events
and contains over 2 million 10-sec audio clips excerpted from
YouTube videos covering 527 classes. Each audio clip in this
dataset may contain multiple labels. Audio Set can be divided
into a balanced training set about 20,000 segments, an unbal-
anced training set with different number of audio clips per class
about 2 million segments and a balanced evaluation set about
20,000 segments. For Audio Set classiﬁcation, the previous
works [2, 3] take the published bottleneck features as input and
the dimension of each feature is 10 × 128. Speciﬁcally, the fea-
tures are extracted from a ResNet-50 model pre-trained on log-
mel spectrograms of 70 million samples in YouTube-100M [4].
Unlike these works, we use only Audio Set other than much
larger YouTube dataset to train the classiﬁcation model. In our
network, the input is the raw waveform with a dimension of 1
× (10 × 16000), which indicates the audio clip length is 10
seconds and the sampling frequency is 16 kHz.

4.2. Details

As shown in Figure 1, we propose a two-stage ResNet archi-
tecture for Audio Set classiﬁcation taking raw waveforms as
input.
In this architecture, 1D ResNet-18 extracts discrimi-
native frequency-like features and 2D ResNet-50 combining
multi-level prediction is used to classify the extracted features.
The multi-level prediction is implemented by applying attention
structure after the 2th, 3th, 4th bottleneck block, respectively. In
the attention structure, the hidden units of the fully connected
layer are 600 and the activation function is ReLU. In our ex-
periments, we apply the mix-training strategy to train the two-
stage ResNet architecture. We use Adam optimizer [23], and
the learning rate is 3 × 10−4 and 3 × 10−5 in training and ﬁne-
tuning step. In the mix-training process, we experimentally ﬁnd
that the mixed ratio α ∈ (0.4, 0.6) can achieve better perfor-

Table 1: Comparisons of results of different works on Audio Set classiﬁcation.

Method

mAP AUC

d-prime

Input

Pre-train (Dataset)

[4] Benchmark
[3] Single-level attention
[2] Multi-level attention
Ours w/o mix-training
Ours

0.314
0.327
0.360
0.351

0.372

0.959
0.965

0.970

0.962
0.968

2.452
2.558

2.660

2.510
2.614

Log-mel spectrogram Yes (YouTube-100M)
Bottleneck features
Yes (YouTube-100M)
Bottleneck features
Yes (YouTube-100M)
Raw waveforms
No
Raw waveforms
No

mance. To solve the highly unbalanced problem of Audio Set,
we use a data balancing strategy where the training samples of
each class appear with the same frequency in a batch.
Like [2–4], we evaluate our model with Google’s bench-
mark metrics: mean average precision (mAP), area under curve
(AUC) and d-prime. The higher the values of these metrics, the
better the audio classiﬁcation performance.

Table 3: Comparisons of results with different output sizes of
1D-ResNet and batch sizes.

Output size

128 × 1 × 1250
128 × 1 × 2500
128 × 1 × 2500

Batch size mAP AUC

d-prime

192
192
256

0.349
0.372
0.372

0.961
0.965
0.968

2.500
2.558
2.614

4.3. Analysis

4.3.1. Comparisons of training strategies

4.3.3. Results

In this subsection, we employ the balanced training set in Audio
Set to explore the effectiveness of the mix-training strategy. The
results evaluated on the balanced evaluation set are summarized
in Table 2. When mixup [17] is applied to train the model, the
performance is improved. However, the ratio label ˜yk = αyi +
(1 − α) yj used in mixup limits the improvement in multi-label
classiﬁcation. The mixed label ˜yk = sign (yi + yj ) generated
by our mix-training strategy presents better performance. Fine-
tuning, adapting the network to the original data distribution,
leads to further performance improvement. The mix-training
strategy is a better choice for multi-label audio classiﬁcation.

Table 2: Comparisons of training strategies on the balanced
training set containing about 20,000 segments. “No” means
that we train the network without any training strategy.

Training strategy

mAP AUC d-prime

No
[17] mixup
mix-training w/o ﬁne-tuning
mix-training

0.231
0.270
0.276
0.296

0.94
0.94
0.94
0.95

2.22
2.25
2.27
2.38

4.3.2. Comparisons of parameters

Table 3 shows the comparisons of results with different out-
put sizes of 1D-ResNet and batch sizes. These experiments are
based on the unbalanced training set containing about 2 million
segments. As described in Section 3.2, the output size of 1D-
ResNet is C × 1 × T , where C is the number of features with
a size of 1 × T . In our experiments, we observe that the larger
the size of frequency-like features, the better the audio classiﬁ-
cation performance. The reason is that the larger features can
retain richer information. Experimentally, the larger batch size
which can reduce the variance of stochastic gradients is also
helpful to improve the performance. Limited by GPU memory,
the output size of 1D-ResNet is 128 × 1 × 2500 and the batch
size is 256 in our experiments.

In Table 1, we compare the classiﬁcation results of different
works on Audio Set. The mAP of the state-of-the-art classiﬁca-
tion model [2] on Audio Set is 0.360, which outperforms Kong
et al. [3] of 0.327 and Google’s baseline [4] of 0.314. To our
knowledge, all the three works pre-trained their models with the
YouTube-100M much larger than Audio Set and none of them
is an end-to-end system. In our experiments, we use only Au-
dio Set to train the proposed end-to-end model (see Figure 1)
by taking raw waveforms as input without any pre-training pro-
cess. Furthermore, the mix-training strategy is adopted to im-
prove the performance. Without the assistance of extra data but
Audio Set, our method achieves a 1.2% improvement in mAP
over the state-of-the-art method.
Speciﬁcally, the last two lines in Table 1 shows the classi-
ﬁcation results of our proposed network with and without mix-
training strategy. As shown in Table 1, the values of mAP, AUC
and d-prime are all higher if we use mix-training strategy than
not, which proves that the mix-training strategy is helpful to im-
prove the classiﬁcation performance. Compared to Table 2, the
degree of improvement is smaller in Table 1. That’s because the
good performance depends on a sufﬁcient amount of training
data and the smaller training set can get more performance gain
from the data augmentation.

5. Conclusion

In this paper, we propose a raw-waveforms-based end-to-end
audio classiﬁcation system with a mix-training strategy.
In-
putting raw waveforms, the system performs both feature ex-
traction by 1D ResNet and classiﬁcation by 2D ResNet. It is
the ﬁrst attempt to take raw waveforms as input in Audio Set
classiﬁcation, which retains rich information and makes end-to-
end possible. Furthermore, we apply a mix-training strategy to
train the model with both mixed data and raw data. The strat-
egy is simple and powerful to improve the performance on the
limited training data. Experiments show that the proposed sys-
tem trained with only Audio Set outperforms the state-of-the-
art multi-level attention model using the knowledge pre-trained
on YouTube-100M. In future work, the mix-training strategy
could provide an approach to alleviate the data limitation in
other tasks, such as speech recognition and image classiﬁcation.

[19] M. Dorfer and G. Widmer, “Training general purpose audio tag-
ging networks with noisy labels and iterative self-veriﬁcation,”
Detection and Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Scenes and Events, vol.
2018, 2018.
[20] Y. Aytar, C. Vondrick, and A. Torralba, “Soundnet: Learning
sound representations from unlabeled video,” in Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems, 2016, pp. 892–900.
[21] A. Kumar, M. Khadkevich, and C. Fugen, “Knowledge transfer
from weakly labeled audio using convolutional neural network
for sound events and scenes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.01369,
2017.
[22] A. Torralba and A. A. Efros, “Unbiased look at dataset bias.”
IEEE, 2011.
[23] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic opti-
mization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

6. References

[1] J. F. Gemmeke, D. P. Ellis, D. Freedman, A. Jansen, W. Lawrence,
R. C. Moore, M. Plakal, and M. Ritter, “Audio set: An ontology
and human-labeled dataset for audio events,” in Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2017 IEEE International Con-
ference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 776–780.
[2] C. Yu, K. S. Barsim, Q. Kong, and B. Yang, “Multi-level attention
model for weakly supervised audio classiﬁcation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.02353, 2018.
[3] Q. Kong, Y. Xu, W. Wang, and M. D. Plumbley, “Audio set classi-
ﬁcation with attention model: A probabilistic perspective,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.00927, 2017.
[4] S. Hershey, S. Chaudhuri, D. P. Ellis, J. F. Gemmeke, A. Jansen,
R. C. Moore, M. Plakal, D. Platt, R. A. Saurous, B. Seybold et al.,
“Cnn architectures for large-scale audio classiﬁcation,” in Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2017 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 131–135.
[5] A. Mesaros, T. Heittola, A. Diment, B. Elizalde, A. Shah, E. Vin-
cent, B. Raj, and T. Virtanen, “Dcase 2017 challenge setup: Tasks,
datasets and baseline system,” DCASE 2017-Workshop on Detec-
tion and Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Scenes and Events, 2017.
[6] J. Lee, J. Park, S. Kum, Y. Jeong, and J. Nam, “Combining multi-
scale features using sample-level deep convolutional neural net-
works for weakly supervised sound event detection,” in Proc.
DCASE, 2017, pp. 69–73.
[7] M. Lederle and B. Wilhelm, “Combining high-level features of
raw audio waves and mel-spectrograms for audio tagging,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1811.10708, 2018.
[8] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning
for image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[9] N. Takahashi, M. Gygli, and L. Van Gool, “Aenet: Learning deep
audio features for video analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Multi-
media, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 513–524, 2018.
[10] K. J. Piczak, “Environmental sound classiﬁcation with convolu-
tional neural networks,” in Machine Learning for Signal Process-
ing (MLSP), 2015 IEEE 25th International Workshop on.
IEEE,
2015, pp. 1–6.
[11] H. Chen, P. Zhang, H. Bai, Q. Yuan, X. Bao, and Y. Yan, “Deep
convolutional neural network with scalogram for audio scene
modeling,” in Proceedings of the Annual Conference of Inter-
national Speech Communication Association (INTERSPEECH),
2018, pp. 3304–3308.
[12] W. Dai, C. Dai, S. Qu, J. Li, and S. Das, “Very deep convolu-
tional neural networks for raw waveforms,” in Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2017 IEEE International Con-
ference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 421–425.
[13] Y. Tokozume and T. Harada, “Learning environmental sounds
with end-to-end convolutional neural network,” in Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2017 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 2721–2725.
[14] B. Zhu, K. Xu, D. Wang, L. Zhang, B. Li, and Y. Peng, “Envi-
ronmental sound classiﬁcation based on multi-temporal resolution
cnn network combining with multi-level features,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.09752, 2018.
[15] N. Takahashi, M. Gygli, B. Pﬁster, and L. Van Gool, “Deep convo-
lutional neural networks and data augmentation for acoustic event
detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07160, 2016.
[16] Y. Tokozume, Y. Ushiku, and T. Harada, “Learning from between-
class examples for deep sound recognition,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.10282, 2017.
[17] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz,
“mixup: Beyond empirical risk minimization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.09412, 2017.
[18] I.-Y. Jeong and H. Lim, “Audio tagging system for dcase 2018:
Focusing on label noise, data augmentation and its efﬁcient learn-
ing,” in Tech. Rep., DCASE2018 Challenge, 2018.

