Designing Virtual Soundscapes for Alzheimer's Disease 
Care 

Frédéric Voisin1 

1 Freelance 

fred@fredvoisin.com 

Abstract. Sound environment is a prime source of conscious and unconscious 
information which allows listeners to place themselves, to communicate, to 
feel, to remember. The author describes the process of designing a new audio 
interactive apparatus for Alzheimer's care, in the context of an active 
multidisciplinary research project led by the author in collaboration with a 
longterm care centre (EHPAD) in Burgundy (France), a geriatrician, a 
gerontologist, psychologists and caregivers. The apparatus, named Madeleines 
Sonores in reference to Proust's madeleine, have provided virtual soundscapes 
sounding for a year for 14 elderly people hosted in the dedicated Alzheimer's 
unit of the care centre, 24/7. Empiric aspects of sonic interactivity are discussed 
in relation to dementia and to the activity of caring. Scientific studies are 
initiated to evaluate the benefits of such a disposal in Alzheimer's disease 
therapy and in caring dementia. 
Keywords: Sound design, Soundscapes, Sonic 
Interaction, Cognitive 
Rehabilitation, Alzheimer's Desease, Dementia, Caring, Quality of Life, Virtual 
Reality. 

1   Introduction 

Nowadays, Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the main cause of dementia. AD usually starts 
slowly and gradually worsens over time with brain damages and main effects on 
memory, cognition and behiavior : short-term and procedural memories are 
progressively affected until severely damaged, with severe spatio-temporal 
disorientation, when long-term memory becomes impaired later [1][2]. When 
different hypothesis may explain the causes of AD, there is no known validated 
pharmacologic therapy. Nevertheless, the research effort present promising results. 
Non-drug therapies are adapted to flatten or compensate the AD effects by stimulating 
cognitive and sensorimotor activities such as music practice and dance, which 
convene neural plasticity processes [3]. Playing and listening to music all together 
stimulate social forms of cognition, emotion and participate to re-entrainments of 
implicit and procedural memories affected by AD [4][5][6].  
In the context of longterm care centres (EHPAD), these recent results encourage 
group musical activities led by music therapists in a variety of non-drug therapies for 
AD. Nevertheless in such a longterm care context, musical activity may be too rare 
and the benefits for each victim of AD are difficult to evaluate, particularly when the 
latter may present different forms of dementia. 

Author's preprint version, accepted in july 2019 for the 
14th Intern. Symposium Computer Music Multidisciplinary 
Research. 

 
 
2         Frédéric Voisin 

As a geriatrician may observe in his own practice in such a context, too little 
attention is generally given to all sonic interactions which include not only music but 
various oral communications, noises, audio productions... and silences, all that 
actually defines the standard soundscapes of a living and social place in a hospital 
environment.  
Moreover, such sonic interactions are able to recall facts from subjects’ trivial 
(long term) memory, and reach the subcortical circuits spared by the disease, in 
particular those that are related to emotion as well as hearing. 
In 2016, an experimentation by Dr Jeannin with AD victims showed that some 

peculiar sounds can help recall long-term memories and emotions, when the listener's 
performance shows no relation with standard cognitive tests such as MMSE and NPI. 

conversation [7].  

Dr Jeannin also demonstrates how long such an experience of auditory memory with 
simple sounds implies a knowledge of the biography of the listener : this biographical 
knowledge may facilitate the activity of caring by, for instance, sparking some 
Therefore, some hospital's inner sound environment may not be well adapted to 
AD victims : during the day, loud radio or TV-shows play for a long time in 
individual or collective rooms and can make a continuous flow of informations that 
has mostly become incomprehensible in the studied cases of  dementia. At night, 
wanderings are not rare in deep silence with no landmarks, no surprise, nowhere to go 
when the way back may be already lost in anonymous and closed halls, etc. 
When sonic interactions may focus on the caring activity in a clinical perspective, a 
question may be: how would sound directly take part in AD caring ? 
It is with this prospect that the Grégoire Direz Residence (EHPAD) in Mailly-le-
Château has welcomed, since July 2017, a sound design research action in their unit 
specially equipped for AD victims. The hospital, its geriatric physician (Dr Pierre 
Jeannin), and its care team work together with a gerontologist (Prof. France Mourey1) 
on scientific aspects while I work on conceiving and carrying out the sound device on 
location: the « Madeleines sonores ». 
To be pragmatic, we presume that from a functional and systematic point of view, 
not only music but every sound may involve various cognitive and emotional circuits 
[9][10]. An hypothesis would be that as soon as emotions and long-term memory still 
strong in later stages of AD (alexithymia appears late), not only music but any sound, 
if well chosen sounds, may help the caring activity [7] for AD : being in situ (i.e. on 
location), attention, social processes as well as emotion – itself able to move us – can 
be called upon as much through the music as from a variety of familiar or merely 
recognized sounds. Where, when and how sounds occur seem to be relevant questions 
to AD and dementia in a longterm health care centre. 
Finally, one may consider that a continuity exists between "music" and "non-
music" or "noise", which vary according to the human society and its history. 
According to Luigi Russolo, Edgar Varèse, John Cage, Pierre Henri, Muray Schafer 
and others, a silent rest, a siren and other urban or natural soundscapes may be 
considered as "music" in certain conditions. Anthropologists and musicologists have 

1 Gerontologist, at Cognition, Action and Sensorimotor Plasticity Lab., UMR Inserm Unit 1093 
- Université de Bourgogne, Dijon (France). 

Author's preprint version, accepted in july 2019 for the 
14th Intern. Symposium Computer Music Multidisciplinary 
Research. 

 
 
 
                                                             
shown a very large variety of music productions in relation to humans, animals, 
nature or surnatural beings. 

Designing Soundscapes for AD Care          3          

2 Designing Soundscapes for AD victims 

Pragmatically, we suggest designing virtual soundscapes adapted not only to 
different stages of dementia due to AD, i.e. to different mind states and beliefs, but 
also to some of the physiological effects of aging, such as a reduced visual field, 
hearing loss (or blocked ears), altered movement control, relative perceptions of time, 
etc. Starting from my own experience, from philosophical and ecological aspects of 
soudscapes from philosophical and theoretical frameworks devoted to soundscapes 
and mental health [8][9][10], and from rare references to some experiments on sound 
and soundscapes for AD victimes [11][12], I decided at first to chart the time and 
space of this very particular place and, then, to focus on anxiety phenomena that a 
sound environment may generate in certain conditions, particularly with elderly 
people. 
After my first observations done for nights and days in the Alzheimer's Unit at the 
EHPAD under the supervision of Dr Jeannin and of the caring team, I decided at first 
to design the common areas of the Unit, where people spend place most of their time 
standing, moving, doing some activity or resting, with the care team. 
The first sounds I had to produce had to obviously be congruent with the physical 
environment: big rooms, corridors, impersonal furniture, windows overlooking 
beautiful gardens and, in the distance, a village ... They also had to be congruent with 
the immediate perception and beliefs the residents may have, residents who are 
affected by (various forms of) dementia but who also bravely bear the various marks 
of now ancient times! To answer these multiple deteriorations of perception (vision, 
audition, proprioception), I deemed necessary to start with reinforcing what already 
existed to increase perception, thus “reality” in some ergonomical perspective. This is 
the context in which, afterwards, sounds were supposed – tactfully – to encourage 
each one’s imagination of former memories, collectively as well as individually, 
ordinary as well as extraordinary : not only with sound samples played out of their 
context, but sound effects. 
A great variety of sound effects may partake in the staging of different sound 
realities and their modelling. With that prospect, I suggest understanding the notion of 
sound effect with an emphasis on  a “logic of meaning”, between the cause and the 
event itself, “in a dimension that is altogether that of event and of situation”, through 
the “demonstration of a phenomenon that supports the [assumed] existence of the 
object” [13]. Therefore, the staging of this particular hospital space, that has become 
the canvas of a ‟film for the ear”, must be as much part of the scripting as of the 
content of the generated sound flows. By the way, the digital audioprocessing used in 
the actual disposal are not numerous: some peculiar synthesisers and peculier sound 
players with volume controls, fading, filters and a reverb.  On the contrary, the logical 
and stochastic effects are much richer and are the subject of the original computer 
coding (see below Section 4). 

Author's preprint version, accepted in july 2019 for the 
14th Intern. Symposium Computer Music Multidisciplinary 
Research. 

 
 
 
4         Frédéric Voisin 

In the map above (see Figure 1), sounds produced from realistic sources from 
outside are supposed to be welcome in such a hospital's closed space : at its extreme 
borders, synthesized sounds of (virtual) bells give night and day to the listeners the 
(real) hours... or a landmark, as well as a short but regular game for cognitive 
stimulation (counting the strokes). In the patio, a granular audio synthesizer produces 
a continuous but varying waterfall sound, congruent with the beautiful but silent view, 
when the windows cannot be opened for security reasons. 
This very first signals appear to be strong enough as landmarks to allow some 
algorithmic variations, depending on a mix between the actual and virtual place, on 
both the weather and the rhythm of the caring activity : when the sound quality of the 
waterfall or of the bells can change according to the outside temperature, or to the 
amount of humidity in air, their loudness intensity varies according to the care activity 
as well as to the cosmological events. Periods of days and seasons are also marked by 
a variety of geophonic sounds such as rain and wind which vary according to the 
actual weather... On the biophonic side, animal populations and their audio activity 
also change according the actual season, weather and ethological data. In the same 
way, the biophonic production is in relation with the precise location of the 
broadcasting of sound: birds that might come – whether in reality or virtually – to the 
waterfall in the patio are not the same ones as those that can be heard in the little 
living room on the North side, neither are they the same as those that can be heard in 
the big living on the South side. 
The time-length of the animal sound sequences is approximately twenty minutes 
long, depending on weather conditions. Their intensity and density, therefore the 
duration of silences, depend on season and weather. Thus different tones continuously 
blend while they « naturally » diversify, as the algorithm gives the sound of birds in 
the rain, that would be more often crows in winter and tits in spring. When the 
sonorous broadcasting through loudspeakers is allowed for by the layout, audio 
spatialization effects may be produced, with moderation, to render movements 
coming from the wind, trees, birds, mammals...  
Sounds that are distinctive to human activity, more variable are arbitrary, are 
broadcast in other (more infrequent) places of the common space. For example, in the 
area of the dining room sounds may suggest meal preparation. In this case, aiming at 
realism, and especially at respecting a multimodal congruence (here audition vs. 
taste), the choice of sound samles can, eventually, be made consistent with the menu, 
and the sound of a pressure cooker made become more frequent in winter than in 
spring: this implies, therefore, collaborating with cooks ! 

Author's preprint version, accepted in july 2019 for the 
14th Intern. Symposium Computer Music Multidisciplinary 
Research. 

 
 
 
 
Designing Soundscapes for AD Care          5          

Figure 1.  Layout of the loudspeakers in the common spaces of the Alzheimer’s Unit: 1) the 
broadcasting points of the landmarks: bells and waterfalls (black circles), can also play 
geophonic and biophonic sequences ; 2) the broadcasting points of sounds for geophony or 
biophony and occasional human sonic activities from outside (grey circles) ; and 3) the 
broadcasting points of human audio activities, mostly from inside (dashed circles). The 
bedrooms have two broadcasting points each (smaller empty circles) : only six of them are 
shown on this map.  

Extreme attention is given to the sound pressure intensity. I adapted the sound 
production with a rather unusual but conscious concern for the continuously exposed 
audience. Calibrated measures of acoustic pressure are underway. 
In the common spaces, that are the noisiest, the acoustic pressure produced is 
unevenly distributed. Periods of silence (the acoustic pressure being of roughly 30 
dBA) are frequent, except in the patio that overlooks the inner garden and its waterfall 
whose sound is continuous, though variable during long periods depending on time 
and weather conditions (minimum pressure of roughly 40 dBA). From the little living 
room on the north side, some sounds are broadcast loud enough to be heard as we 
arrive from the corridors that lead to it. In this more isolated place than the others, that 
leads to meditation or strolling, periods of silence alternate with active periods (with 
an acoustic pressure of 70 dBA and peaks at 80 dBA).  
Until now, as is confirmed by the written notes taken by the care team, voiced 
complaints have never been about sound pressure, but rather about their eventual 
existence and pertinence. On the contrary, it even seems as if, with time, sounds tend 
to not be noticed consciously, at least by the health care workers. In agreement with 
the care team, the general sound pressure has even been reinforced with 
experimentation, in particular to compensate the eventual hearing deficiencies of the 
residents. 
As recommended by music therapists [14], the general shape of a sound sequence, 
aside from the sound landmarks, for example the chirping of a bird, or horses passing, 

Author's preprint version, accepted in july 2019 for the 
14th Intern. Symposium Computer Music Multidisciplinary 
Research. 

 
 
 
 
6         Frédéric Voisin 

etc. follows as much as is possible a U-shape for about 20’, most often followed by a 
period of silence. 
Insofar as we offer to encourage mnesic recalling and, in order to achieve that, to 
resort to attention cognitive processes, we suggest also resorting to a form of ABA’ 
shape in which the sound shape A would tend to ressemble a call. It can be noticed, as 
a matter of fact, that the U-shape, that can also change into an inverted “J”, conjures 
up a kind of returning (if only that of an increasing tempo), like the ABA’ shape. 
Each broadcasting point being independent, several sequences can partly overlap in 
various places. The number of simultaneous voices in the same location remains, 
however, voluntarily limited so as not to saturate the sound space, without, for that 
matter, preventing more or less fortuitous sounds meeting. Silences also allow, 
depending on what sounds are conjured up by the context, various effects that can 
concern sometimes a feeling of expectation (calls), at other times relief (response), 
mirroring the shape of a rhythm. 
When the soundscapes of the common spaces take their inspiration from an as 
common reality, the broadcasting of soundscapes in the private spaces (bedrooms) is 
much more personalized. The scripting strategies there are somewhat different since 
the idea is to conjure up the residents’ old memories while avoiding to cause 
confusional states that would take place in particular moments that the care team 
would help define. The choice of sounds and their staging here has to answer the 
congruence with a reality perceived in a state of dementia – which needs to be 
diagnosed in the best possible way – as well as the life story of the listener. We also 
have to admit that such diagnoses are not often enough made, with regards the 
evolution of the disease. Different protocols, based on the above-mentioned 
principles, are being considered. 
Some simple and repetitive sounds, that conjure up a bygone past, may have a 
soothing effect: an initial observation, along with the care team, showed that the 
warm, slow and regular sound of a grandfather clock’s pendulum, slowed down to an 
every-two-second impulse, seems to ease the sleeping phases and allow for a better 
sleep. Such observations are still, at this point of experimentation, to be confirmed 
experimentally: the rooms are in the process of being empirically and progressively 
fitted with sound. We hope that, in the long run, such an experimentation may enable 
to elaborate a precise questionnaire, based – for example – on a guided listening of 
sounds which are defined beforehand, that better allows to characterize each 
resident’s sensitivity to different sounds. 
This personnalized aspect of conception, the most delicate, is in the course of being 
experimented and will progressively be deployed. 

3 Soundscapes for caregivers 

Obviously, some sounds may be difficult to play with. In some conditions, with 
dementia, when the perception of some sounds imply, as a reflex, the viewing of their 
origin, their separation from their real or imaginary cause may create confusional 
states: to avoid such a case, the help of a caregiver is useful to explain the origin of 
such a sound, to calm the person down and to finally have — as expected — some 

conversation. 

Author's preprint version, accepted in july 2019 for the 
14th Intern. Symposium Computer Music Multidisciplinary 
Research. 

 
 
Designing Soundscapes for AD Care          7          

Conceiving a sound environment and its dynamics, necessariy involves the health 
care team. Sound must not interfere with care, it must help and support it. We can 
therefore consider that sound may help the patient in directly adressing him or her 
while addressing the care team as well. With their assent and their complicity, oral 
conversations may be engaged in and sounds adopted.  
For example, in the very first days following the beginning of the setup (in July 
2018), nursing auxiliaries asked me for the new bells in the commons spaces never to 
leave: the opportunity and ergonomics of such a multi-functional sequence of a 
simple sound, repeated twice an hour (at 2' interval), 24 hours a day allows to mark a 
territory, to recall an hour common to all, to be the opportunity for a social exchange, 
and to become a training of different short-term memories, indeed to become part of 
spontaneous cognitive assessment, almost at any time. And slight periodic variations 
of the sound synthesis of bells can be sought for, for who might want it if only per 
chance. More or less shared knowledge, whether popular, personal or specialized, 
may be called upon on the subject of some animal sound production. Producing some 
insect sounds, or mammal ones, for example, has been the subject of discussions with 
the care team as regards their realism, the cridibility, or the emotional states they are 
likely to cause. 
Soundification of virtual human activities may also take part in the organisation of 
care: for example, the sound accompanying meals may be realised in such a way that 
it more or less consciously prepares the residents to eat. This anticipation may be all 
the more appreciated as the residents themselves are incapable, because of their 
dementia, of knowing that it is in fact really time to eat... Such an effect is most 
certainly welcome when it contributes to the support of demented people in the 
absence of any other clue that would be obvious and familiar to them, in a hospital 
context. 
The developpement of a closer feedback and control interface from the care team is 
contemplated. Conceiving such an interface would should directly integrate existing 
computer interfaces already devoted to caring. With that as a goal, research in 
psychosociology on the links between sonic environment and care has already began 
under the supervision of Prof. France Mourey. A first study of the effects of 
“Madeleines sonores” (the virtual soundscapes, the plan of action) on the relationship 
between caregivers and care receivers is based on collecting information during 
interviews with the various professionals linked with this project. The thematic 
analysis [15] of the interviews that were carried out have allowed to establish one (or 
more) questionnaire(s) that may characterize the representations and attitudes that the 
care team takes up faced with the sound plan of action2. We are considering that the 
use of such a questionnaire may allow to know the attitudes that come into play while 
applying the sound plan of action, this being to clarify the contribution in relation 
with the resident. Moreover, knowing how the care team sees this sound plan of 
action also partakes in evaluating its effects, in terms of contribution or benefits, with 
the residents. 

2  I would like to thank Arnaud Bidotti,  Master in Occupational and Organizational Psychology 
who led this study in March and April 2019 under the scientific supervision of  Prof. Edith 
Salès-Wuillement, Laboratoire Psy-DREPI EA-7458 
(Psychologie: Dynamiques 
Relationnelles et Processus Identitaires), Université de Bourgogne. 

Author's preprint version, accepted in july 2019 for the 
14th Intern. Symposium Computer Music Multidisciplinary 
Research. 

 
 
                                                             
8         Frédéric Voisin 

4 A Digital Architecture for Virtual Soundscapes 

The soundscapes are systematically generated and mixed in real-time using a 
distributed architecture with a principal generator (see the « Soundscape Generator », 
in Figure 2 below) that can be described as a server hosting the sound database and a 
set of routines periodically executed by its operating system scheduler3. These 
routines, written in Lisp language and Unix-like shell scripts, compute different kinds 
of mapping, empirically developped, relevant to the environmental data as modelised, 
to its inner virtual population and to individual data (biographies). They finally 
control 24 on-board computers4 fixed in the ceiling of the common and private spaces 
and hosting their own digital signal processing (DSP) and loudspeakers (the 
« Players », in Figure 2).   

Figure 2. General principle of the Madeleines Sonores 

All the soundscapes are generated as a remix of short sound samples (lasting from 
a few seconds to a few dozens of seconds), or using sound synthesizers models 
adapted from my own experience [16] and from [17]. The sound samples, specially 
recorded or adapted from open sound collections to represent various places, 
activities, animals and human societies from the 40's, 50's, are retrieved from a large 

3 Cf. cron programs in Unix-like operating systems (see: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron ). 
4 All computers operating systems are GNU-Linux based. The on-board ARM based computers 
are Raspberry Pi3-B+ with audio boards IQaudio Pi-DigiAMP+ and in-ceiling 6.5'' 
loudspeakers QI 65C/St by QAcoustics (70 Hz to 16 kHz ± 3 dB, up to 90 dBA max pressure 
level). The DSP is built using Pure Data open-source software [18]. The communications are 
based on TCP/IP protocols: secure-shell (SSH) for asynchronous sound transferts, UDP for 
real-time controls. 

Author's preprint version, accepted in july 2019 for the 
14th Intern. Symposium Computer Music Multidisciplinary 
Research. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
Designing Soundscapes for AD Care          9          

database with thousands of items indexed by myself. Periods of silence between 
sound samples or synthesizers are more or less short and always irregular. They 
define the density of virtual events that occur depending on each resident’s sensitivity 
and the general context: according to daytime periods, the year, the care provided, etc. 
In the individual rooms, the soundscapes are rendered using two equivalent 
monophonic loudspeakers placed across the room, one close to the window and the 
other facing the bed. The activation of the soundscapes entirely depends on the 
explicit approval of whom concerned: the individual, himself, herself or their family 
when he or she cannot agree for clinical reasons and, obviously, by the caring team 
(doctors, psychologists, nurses). 
All hi-level instructions, play-lists, sound filenames, pressure levels, etc are 
systematically locally logged. The overall disposal can be remotely controled and 
monitored thru a standard secured connection (SSH) on internet, using any Unix-like 
terminal. Confidentiality is ensured in particular by the entire anonymity of the 
digitized data. 

5 Discussion 

The work presented here is only the beginning of a long conceiving process in an 
emerging activity within the field of sound design, mental health and care. Its actual 
state is an action-research led in the fields of sound art, human and health science, and 
technology. 
Our first observations are encouraging: the behaviour of part of the residents 
suggest that not only the residents appreciate the variety of the new sound 
environment but they tend to place themselves close to the audio sources to recollect 
or to meditate, whether consciously or not (see Fig. 3 below). The questionnaire we 
developed should make it possible to make care givers aware of the effects of sound 
environment on AD victims. 
After such a first research that was necessarily empirical, considering the 
innovative characteristic of the project, applications respecting a truly experimental 
protocol have to be considered. 
Optimizing the algorithms that was developped for that purpose still has to be 
done, as the deployment of the plan of action is being ratified. Particular attention 
should be focused onto indexing the sound samples insofar as they should enable, not 
only to identify the origin, the nature and the quality of sounds, but also, beyond their 
psycho-accoustic properties, the emotions and reactions they are liable to cause, as 
well as the broadcasting methods (context). In fact, we are contemplating the fact that, 
ultimately, the care team may report the reactions they provoke thanks to an interface 
that remains to be created. Such an interface would then enable to directly partake in 
the experimental phase of the plan. 
The whole plan of action is for the moment operating as a multimedia work of art 
(sound and computer) that falls within the altogether artistic, scientific and clinical 
perspective that federates different social and economic players in a humanistic 
dynamic of research and innovation. 

Author's preprint version, accepted in july 2019 for the 
14th Intern. Symposium Computer Music Multidisciplinary 
Research. 

 
 
10         Frédéric Voisin 

Figure 3. A resident is meditating at the closest place to the audio 
source mounted at the ceiling. 

Thanks 

I am particularly thankful to Dr Pierre Jeannin for his benevolence, his logistic and 
voluntary support, and of course to the charity Castel-Mailletaise that welcomed this 
project, and the care team that is closely involved in it. My thanks also go towards 
France Mourey for her support. And I am grateful to Claire Webster for emending and 
translating parts of this article.  

Author's preprint version, accepted in july 2019 for the 
14th Intern. Symposium Computer Music Multidisciplinary 
Research. 

 
 
 
References 

Designing Soundscapes for AD Care          11          

Dementias. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 39, 1–11 (2014) 

Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 28, pp. 36–46 (2009) 

Langage et Aphasie, Séminaire Jean-Louis Signoret, 205–228. Bruxelles : De Boeck 

1. Eustache, F. : Langage, vieillissement et démences. In F. Eustache & B. Lechevalier (Eds.) 
Université (1993) 
2. Dubois, B., Feldman, H. H., Jacova, C., Cummings, J. L., DeKosky, S. T., Barberger-Gateau, 
P., Delacourte, A., Frisoni, G., Fox, N. C., Galasko, D., Gauthier, S., Hampel, H., Jicha, G. 
A., Meguro, K., O’Brien, J., Pasquier, F., Rober, P., Rossor, M., Salloway, S., Sarazin, M., 
de Souza, L. C., Stern, Y., Visser, P. J., & Scheltens, P. : Revising the definition of 
Alzheimer’s disease : a new lexicon. Lancet neurology 9, 118–127 (2010) 
3. Chancellor, B., Duncan, A., Chatterjee, A. : Art Therapy for Alzheimer’s Disease and Other 
4. Guétin, S., Portet, F., Picot, M.C., Pommié, C., Messaoudi, M., Djabelkir, L., Olsen, A.L., 
Cano, M.M., Lecourt, E., Touchon, J. : Effect of Music Therapy on Anxiety and Depression 
in Patients with Alzheimer’s Type Dementia: Randomised, Controlled Study. Dementia and 
5. Moussard, A., Bigand, E., Clément, S., Samson, S. : Préservation des apprentissages 
implicites en musique dans le vieillissement normal et la maladie d’Alzheimer. Revue de 
neuropsychologie 18, 127–152 (2008) 
6. Mofredj, A., Alaya, S., Tassaioust, K., Bahloul, H., Mrabet, A. :2016. Music therapy, a 
review of the potential therapeutic benefits for the critically ill. Journal of Critical Care 35, 
pp. 195–199 (2016)  
7. Jeannin, P.  : Projet Hippocampe  : Les madeleines sonores. Essay, 
http://fredvoisin.com/IMG/pdf/pierre_jeannin-projet_hippocampe.pdf (2017) 
8. Schafer, R.M. : The Tuning of the World, Knopf, New-York (1977) 
9. Westerkamp, H. : Linking Soundscape Composition and Acoustic Ecology. Organised 
Sound, 7/1 (2002).  
10. Andringa, T., Lanser, J. : How Pleasant Sounds Promote and Annoying Sounds Impede 
Public Health 10, 1439–1461 (2013) 
11. Nagahata, K., Fukushima, T., Ishibashi, N., Takahashi, Y., Moriyama, M. : A soundscape 
study  : What kinds of sounds can elderly people affected by dementia recollect? Noise and 
Health 6, 63 (2004) 
12. Burgio, L., Scilley, K., Hardin, J. M., Hsu, C., & Yancey, J. : Environmental «white noise»: 
an intervention for verbally agitated nursing home residents. Journals of Gerontology. 
13. Augoyard, J.F., Torgue, H. : Sonic experience: a guide to everyday sounds. McGill-Queen’s 
Press-MQUP (2014) 
14. Guétin, S., Portet, F., Picot, M.C., Pommié, C., Messaoudi, M., Djabelkir, L., Olsen, A.L., 
Cano, M.M., Lecourt, E., Touchon, J., 2009. Effect of Music Therapy on Anxiety and 
Depression in Patients with Alzheimer’s Type Dementia: Randomised, Controlled Study. 
15. Negura L. : Content analysis in the study of social representations (L’analyse de contenu 
dans l’étude des représentations sociales), SociologieS [Online], Theory and research 
(2006), connection on 2019 May 9th, http://journals.openedition.org/sociologies/993 
16. Author's website, http://www.fredvoisin.com/ 
17. Farnell A. : Designing Sound. The MIT Press. Cambridge, Mass. (2010) 
(Hong Kong, 1996), ICMA, 269-272  (1996). 

18. Puckette M. : Pure Data, Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference 

Health: A Cognitive Approach. International Journal of Environmental Research and 

Series B, Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 51(6), P364-373 (1996) 

Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 28, 36–46. https://doi.org/10.1159/000229024 

Author's preprint version, accepted in july 2019 for the 
14th Intern. Symposium Computer Music Multidisciplinary 
Research. 

 
 
