Magnetic-Assisted Initialization for Infrastructure-free Mobile Robot
Localization

Zhenyu Wu1 , Mingxing Wen1 , Guohao Peng1 , Xiaoyu Tang1 and Danwei Wang1

9
1
0
2

v
o

N

1
2

]

O

R

.

s

c

[

1
v
3
1
3
9
0

.

1
1
9
1

:

v

i

X

r

a

Abstract— Most of the existing mobile robot localization solu-
tions are either heavily dependent on pre-installed infrastructures
or having difﬁculty working in highly repetitive environments
which do not have sufﬁcient unique features. To address this
problem, we propose a magnetic-assisted initialization approach
that enhances the performance of infrastructure-free mobile
robot localization in repetitive featureless environments. The
proposed system adopts a coarse-to-ﬁne structure, which mainly
consists of two parts: magnetic ﬁeld-based matching and laser
scan matching. Firstly, the interpolated magnetic ﬁeld map is
built and the initial pose of the mobile robot is partly determined
by the k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) algorithm. Next, with the
fusion of prior initial pose information, the robot is localized
by laser scan matching more accurately and efﬁciently. In our
experiment, the mobile robot was successfully localized in a
featureless rectangular corridor with a success rate of 88% and
an average correct localization time of 6.6 seconds.

I . IN TRODUC T ION

The development of new algorithms for mobile robot local-
ization is an active area of research in recent years. The exist-
ing solutions can be generally classiﬁed into two categories:
infrastructure-based and infrastructure-free. For infrastructure-
based localization, infrastructures like Wi-Fi and RFID are
installed to help localize the mobile robot. But usually the
costs for purchasing and pre-installing such infrastructures
are high. As for infrastructure-free localization, methods such
as simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)-based and
magnetic ﬁeld-based have much lower cost and can be easily
adapted to almost any environment. Normally, SLAM-based
approaches work well in feature-rich environments. However,
environments like corridors, ofﬁces and carparks have lots of
repetitive settings with few unique features, making SLAM-
based methods inaccurate. Therefore, accurate infrastructure-
free localization in such featureless environments is still a
challenging issue for mobile robot. An example of such
environment is shown in Fig. 1.
Magnetic ﬁeld-based methodology is one of the promis-
ing technologies for localization due to its infrastructure-
free characteristic and pervasiveness. Ever since [1] proposed
the concept of using magnetic ﬁeld variations for indoor
localization, researchers have demonstrated the feasibility of
using the magnetic ﬁeld alone for both 1-D and 2-D indoor
localization [2], [3] and navigation [4], [5] in a few years. In
addition, [2], [3] proved the stability of the disturbed magnetic
ﬁeld over a long period of time. Furthermore, solutions of
the SLAM problem were addressed by [6], [7] based on the
ambient magnetic ﬁeld.

*This work was supported by the ST Engineering-NTU Corporate Labo-
ratory through the NRF Corporate Laboratory@University Scheme.
1All authors are with the School of Electrical and Electronic En-
gineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798. E-mail:
zhenyu002@e.ntu.edu.sg

Fig. 1. The combination of interpolated magnetic ﬁeld map and occupancy
grid map of an approximately 57m×19m featureless rectangular corridor
within the S1 building of NTU. Red dots denote ten different starting
locations and black arrows represent the heading direction of the robot of
the localization process.

The ambient magnetic ﬁeld consists of the geomagnetic
ﬁeld and the magnetic ﬁeld generated by ferromagnetic ob-
jects. The anomalies caused by ferromagnetic objects, which is
generally called ﬁngerprints, can be used to describe the envi-
ronment. The ﬁngerprinting methodology has been becoming
dominant in magnetic ﬁeld localization [3]. By applying k-NN
algorithm, these magnetic ﬁelds can be utilized as a medium
for mobile robot localization.
In addition to magnetometer, the Light Detection and Rang-
ing (LiDAR) is often used as a mobile robot localization and
mapping sensor. Especially, laser scan matching implemented
by LiDAR is generally used [8]–[10]. Moreover, the scan-
to-map matching is adopted due to its high efﬁciency and
robustness rather than the scan-to-scan matching [9], [11].
However, laser scan matching in featureless environments is
challenging because it is difﬁcult to collect enough unique
environmental features.
In this paper, we present a magnetic-assisted initialization
approach to enhance the performance of infrastructure-free
mobile robot
localization in repetitive featureless environ-
ments. The main contributions of this paper are two-fold:
• A magnetic-assisted initialization approach, which partly
implements
k-NN based magnetic ﬁeld matching,
has been proposed to improve the performance of
infrastructure-free mobile robot localization.
• The challenge of infrastructure-free mobile robot local-
ization in repetitive featureless environments has been
addressed.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Related works

 
 
 
 
 
 
are reviewed in Section II. Section III introduces framework of
the proposed system. Section IV presents experiments, results
and evaluations. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section V.

I I . R E LATED WORK

A. Infrastructure-based & Infrastructure-free Method
Most of
the existing indoor
localization methods are
infrastructure-based. Despite its shortcomings like fading due
to the high operating frequency, Wireless Area Network
(WLAN) technology is still the most common method for
indoor localization [12]. However, the access points are de-
ployed for the optimization of communication purposes but
not for localization applications [13].
Besides,
the infrastructure-based and infrastructure-free
method can be integrated. [7] have developed a localization
system by utilizing ambient magnetic and radio measure-
ments. By implementing Rao-Blackwellized particle ﬁlter and
magnetic-assisted heading correction, the concept of magnetic
SLAM was proposed by them. [12] has shown the feasibility
of integrating Wi-Fi and magnetic ﬁeld for indoor localization.
However, all of the above mentioned approaches need to pre-
install the infrastructures and the localization accuracy is not
good enough.

B. Magnetic Field-based Localization
As the magnetic ﬁeld is temporally stable and requires
no hardware installation, it often yields comparable or even
better results to Wi-Fi based localization [14]. The approach
implemented by [4] identiﬁes pillars in a ﬂoor as landmarks
thus creating magnetic ﬁeld maps for the whole ﬂoor. [5] have
shown that the change in the tri-axial magnetic ﬁeld vector
is sufﬁcient to represent re-recognizable features based upon
which precise localization can be performed.
In addition, many works have shown the applicability of
magnetic ﬁeld to localization issues for both mobile robots
[2], [5], [6], [15] and pedestrians [2], [4], [14], [15]. In [15],
M. Frassl et al. further expanded their work in [5] to show
how the use of the magnetic ﬁeld demonstrates signiﬁcant
improvements over odometry-based approach with respect to
the localization accuracy for both robots and pedestrians.

I I I . SY ST EM OV ERV I EW

As shown in the ﬂowchart in Fig. 2, the proposed system
is mainly composed of three parts: 1) Coarse Localization:
Magnetic Field-based Matching; 2) Initial Pose Estimation; 3)
Fine Localization: Laser Scan Matching. Details of these three
parts are discussed below.

A. System Framework
The whole system is mainly divided into two phases: the
Ofﬂine Phase and the Online Phase. For the Ofﬂine Phase, its
main objective is to collect magnetic ﬁeld ﬁngerprints, build
interpolated magnetic ﬁeld map and occupancy grid map of the
environment. For the Online Phase, its main function is to fuse
the magnetic ﬁeld-based matching and laser scan matching to
infer the accurate robot location.
As can be seen in the ﬂowchart, what connects the magnetic
ﬁeld-based matching and the laser scan matching is the initial
pose estimation. The initial pose information consists of two

Fig. 2. The proposed system ﬂowchart

parts: the Location (x, y) and Orientation θ . Both the location
and orientation information are provided by the results of the
magnetic ﬁeld-based matching. Then initial pose information
is fused with the laser scan matching to enhance the per-
formance of infrastructure-free mobile robot localization in
repetitive featureless environments.

B. Coarse Localization: Magnetic Field-based Matching
Normally, the magnetic ﬁeld-based matching algorithm is
divided into two phases: Ofﬂine Phase and Online Phase. The
main objective of the Ofﬂine Phase is to build the interpolated
magnetic ﬁeld map. This map associate a 2-D location with
a 3-D magnetic ﬁeld vector B . In the Online Phase, the real-
time magnetometer measurements are obtained and the coarse
location of the robot can be inferred by applying the k-NN
algorithm.
1) Magnetic Field Fingerprints Collection: In general, the
magnetic ﬁeld vector consists of three components: Bx , By ,
and Bz , which represent intensities in X , Y and Z directions
respectively. In each ﬁngerprint, the localization accuracy is
higher if more components are used. Thus, using all three
components is preferred over using the magnitude alone. The
magnetic ﬁeld ﬁngerprint database is built with the mobile
robot teleoperated on different desired routes, which are along
the trajectories parallel to the straight fence or wall of the
corridor. By recording both 3-D magnetic ﬁeld vectors and 2-
D location information, the magnetic ﬁeld ﬁngerprint database
can be constructed.
2) Bilinear Interpolation of the Magnetic Field: The cost
of collecting complete magnetic ﬁeld vectors is high due to
the narrow measurement range of the magnetometer and the
large size of the environment. It is impossible for the robot
to go to every place in the environment so the magnetic ﬁeld
ﬁngerprint measurements can be sparse or even vacant in some
places. In order to solve this problem, the bilinear interpolation
method is implemented to estimate the missing magnetic ﬁeld
intensities at unexplored locations and build the magnetic ﬁeld

Fig. 3. Magnetic ﬁeld vector components of the rectangular corridor

map of the environment. The interpolated magnetic ﬁeld vector
components of the counter-clockwise robot routes are shown
in Fig. 3.
To approximate the magnetic ﬁeld intensity vector B (Pm )
of an observation point, the coordinates of the observation
point Pm and the coordinates of the four closest reference
points (P11 , P12 , P21 , P22 ) are utilized. As illustrated in Fig. 4,
the linear interpolation along x-axis yields:

B (P (x, y1 )) ≈ x2 − x
x2 − x1
B (P (x, y2 )) ≈ x2 − x
x2 − x1

B (P11 ) +

B (P12 ) +

x − x1
x2 − x1
x − x1
x2 − x1

B (P21 )

B (P22 )

(1)

(2)

Then the linear interpolation along y-axis can be yielded as
[16]:

B (Pm ) ≈ y2 − y
y2 − y1
y2 − y
y2 − y1
y − y1
y2 − y1

=

+

(cid:18) x2 − x
B (P (x, y1 )) +
(cid:18) x2 − x
x2 − x1
x2 − x1

y − y1
y2 − y1
B (P (x, y2 ))
x − x1
B (P11 ) +
x2 − x1
x − x1
x2 − x1

B (P12 ) +

B (P21 )

B (P22 )

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

(3)
3) k-NN Based Matching: After the previous section 1)
and 2), the interpolated magnetic ﬁeld map is obtained. Thus
the k-NN algorithm is implemented to accomplish the coarse
robot
location inference during the online phase. The k-
NN algorithm uses two datasets, which are the training set
(magnetic ﬁeld ﬁngerprint database) and the testing set (real-
time magnetometer measurements). Firstly, the members in
training set are described by 3-D magnetic ﬁeld vector and cor-
responding 2-D location. A point in 3-D vector space, which is
established by the magnetic ﬁeld vector, is represented by each
member in training set. Thus in such a way, all of the members
are mapped into a 3-D vector space. Secondly, the members
in testing set are also distributed in the 3-D vector space but
without knowing their location. After a testing sample is given,
the k-NN classiﬁer searches the k members in training set
which are closest to the given sample. Then the location which
has the majority number in the k neighbors is assigned to the
testing sample. The closeness between the testing sample and
the member in training set can be deﬁned in terms of the
Euclidean Distance, which is given as follows:

d(cid:0)mi , mj

(cid:1) =

(cid:18) n(cid:88)

(cid:19) 1

2

|mil − mj l |2

(4)

l=1

where mi and mj represent two members in n-dimensional
vector space; n is the dimension of the vector space; mil and
mj l indicate the intensities of the magnetic ﬁeld for the two
members in X/Y /Z direction respectively.

Fig. 4. Bilinear interpolation of the grid map. Point Pm is the point whose
magnetic ﬁeld intensity shall be interpolated.

4) Orientation Determination: In our case, the Bx repre-
sents the magnetic ﬁeld strength in the heading direction of
the robot. By represents the magnetic ﬁeld strength in counter
clockwise 90 degrees from the Bx direction. δ represents the
magnetic declination angle between the magnetic north pole
and geographic north pole. And θ represents the angle between
the heading of the robot and the magnetic north. Suppose the
angle between the heading of the robot and the geographic
north is θd , then it can be determined by θd = θ − δ . The
magnetic declination angle δ in Singapore roughly equals to
zero so the magnetic north pole is in the same direction with
the geographic north pole. This means the vector sum of the
Bx and By is pointing to the Geographic North. The above
mentioned relationships between these directions are shown in
Fig. 5.
Therefore, the rotation from the robot body frame to East-
North-Up global reference frame (Right-handed Cartesian
Coordinate System) is taken as the orientation estimation for
the robot. By measuring ambient magnetic ﬁeld vector in these
two frames, the rotation between these two frames can be
predicted. Leaving out the translation part, the origins of these
two frames are supposed to coincide with each other. The
ambient magnetic ﬁeld vector B ∈ R3 is written as BG in
the static global reference frame and accordingly the B in the
robot body frame can be represented as BL . With respect to the
global reference frame, the heading of the robot body frame is
expressed as a rotation matrix L
GR which can be represented
GR · BL . The angle φ and uniﬁed axis a of the
rotation are derived as:

as BG = L

(cid:33)

(cid:32)

BL · BG

(cid:107)BL (cid:107)(cid:107)BG (cid:107)

φ = arccos
BL × BG
(cid:107)BL × BG (cid:107)

a =

(5)

(6)

In our case, it is reasonable to assume that the robot is
moving along the direction parallel to the straight fence or wall
of the corridor as most of the warehouse robots are doing so
in corridors. The x and y axis of the global reference frame
are shown as xG and yG in Fig. 1. Thus the determination
of the robot orientation can be divided into three cases: 1)
Angle φ = 0, the robot is heading towards positive x axis; 2)
Angle φ = π , the robot is heading towards negative x axis;

is performing in the background, will add the corresponding
pose to the optimization problem once it ﬁnds a good match.
Like the scan matching, a nonlinear least squares model also
can be applied to solve the global loop closure optimization
problem. The extensive literature on this part is available in
[18], [19]. For the global approach, the loop closure removes
the accumulated laser scan matching error caused by the local
approach.
3) Localization: As mentioned in the previous two sub-
sections, the occupancy grid map is built by continuously
accumulating submaps and implementing loop closure op-
timizations. With the initial pose information provided by
the magnetic ﬁeld-based matching, the mobile robot can be
localized by laser scan matching more accurately. Once the
real-time laser scans are correctly matched with the points and
lines in the previously built occupancy grid map, the mobile
robot is considered to be successfully localized.
Repetitive environments like corridors and ofﬁces have lots
of highly similar features. Localization in such environments
often leads to failed matching due to the lack of unique
features. To make this issue more clear, an example of the
laser scan matching in such environment is shown in Fig. 7.
Without any initial information, a failed matching is shown
in Fig. 7(b) where the robot was wrongly localized to a very
similar turning corner of the corridor. But if both the initial
location (x, y) and orientation θ information provided by the
magnetic ﬁeld-based matching are given to the laser scan
matching, the matching will be successful in most cases. A
successful matching example is shown in Fig. 7(c).

IV. EX PER IM EN TA L R E SU LT S

A. Platform
Fig. 6 demonstrates the experimental platform used in this
study and the robot body frame. The main part of the platform
is a Husky A200 Robot. A Xsens MTi-10 IMU is installed at
the central place of the robot. And a Hokuyo UTM-30LX
2-D Scanning Laser Rangeﬁnder is installed at the front of
the robot. All the tests are performed on a laptop with AMD
FX-9830P CPU @3.0GHz and a RAM of 12GB size.

B. Magnetic Field Map & Occupancy Grid Map Building
The experiments are conducted in a featureless rectangular
corridor environment with ofﬁces in the central part. The

Fig. 6. Huksy robot platform

Fig. 5. Magnetic ﬁeld directions

3) Angle φ = π
2 , the robot is heading towards negative y axis
if uniﬁed axis a pointing upwards or the robot is heading
towards positive y axis if uniﬁed axis a pointing downwards.

C. Fine Localization: Laser Scan Matching
For the ﬁne localization part,
the laser scan matching
method is mainly composed of three parts: Local 2-D SLAM,
both of them optimize the scan pose σ = (cid:0)σx , σy , ψ)T which
consist of a translation (cid:0)σx , σy )T and a rotation ψ of the
Global Loop Closure, and Localization. For the ﬁrst two parts,
LiDAR scans.
1) Local 2-D SLAM: Submap, which is a small part of the
world, is built by the iterative process of repeatedly aligning
a few consecutive laser scans with submap coordinate frames.
By setting the origin of the laser scan at (0, 0)T in the Eu-
clidean Plane R2 , the laser scan endpoints can be represented

real-time laser scan endpoints are transformed from the scan
frame into the submap frame by the transformation Tσ . This
process is deﬁned as:

as S = {(sj,x , sj,y )T }j=1,2,...,J , sj = (sj,x , sj,y )T ∈ R2 . The
(cid:18) sj,x
sj,y

(cid:18) cos(ψ) −sin(ψ)
sin(ψ)
cos(ψ)

Tσ sj =

(cid:19)

(7)

+

(cid:18) σx
σy

(cid:19)
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)

tσ

(cid:19)
(cid:125)

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

Rσ

where Rσ and tσ represent the Rotation and Translation part
respectively.
According to the current local submap which implements
the scan matcher [17], the scan pose σ is optimized before the
insertion of a laser scan into a submap. Function of the scan
matcher is to search for a optimum scan pose which can best
align the current laser scan with the submap once every few
seconds. This can be represented as a nonlinear least squares
problem:

J(cid:88)

(cid:16)

(cid:0)Tσ sj

(cid:1)(cid:17)2

1 − Msmooth

σ∗ = argmin

σ

j=1

(8)
values at the coordinates given by (cid:0)Tσ sj
(cid:1) in the local submap;
where function Msmooth : R2 → R smooths the probability
Tσ is the previously mentioned transformation.
2) Global Loop Closure: Since larger spaces are composed
of many small submaps,
the sparse pose adjustment [18]
is adopted for the optimization of all laser scan poses and
submap poses. Once the submap is settled, the pairs made
up of a submap and a scan is considered for loop closure.
The scan matcher mentioned in the previous subsection, which

success rate of different initial pose options. The proposed
method has the highest average success rate of 88% over all
waypoints, while the option with only location information and
the option without any initial information achieve an average
success rate of 35% and 40% respectively over all waypoints.
The sudden drop of the success rate of waypoint #4 is due to
the strong magnetic interference from a nearby cargo elevator
(as shown in Fig. 1). Wrong orientation information is given
to the robot thus it worsens the localization performance.
As shown in Table I, the localization efﬁciency is measured
by the time the robot takes to be successfully localized and the
accuracy is measured by the Root-Mean-Square Error(RMSE).
The F in Table I represents that the robot can not localize
itself so the experiment is considered failed. The proposed
method achieves an average correct localization time of 6.6
seconds, while the option with only location information and
the option without any initial information achieve an average
of 7.17 seconds and 11.03 seconds respectively. As for the
accuracy, the RMSE of the proposed method is 1.43m over
all successfully localized waypoints, while the RMSE of the
option with only known initial location and the option with
unknown initial pose are 2.26m and 2.25m respectively.
The results show clearly that
the proposed method has
greatly improved the localization success rate and efﬁciency
compared with only using the laser scan matching-based lo-
calization. And the results also reveal that even without initial
pose information, the localization performance is comparable
with the performance of the initial pose option with only loca-
tion. This demonstrates that orientation plays a more important
role than location in the initialization of infrastructure-free
mobile robot localization.

TABLE I

LOCAL I ZAT ION E FFIC I ENCY AND ACCURACY O F THR EE IN I T IA L PO SE
O PT ION S

Waypoint

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6

#7

#8

#9

#10

Initial Pose Option
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3

F
F

7.1s

5.7s

6.1s

6.2s
F

6.9s
5.5s

F
F
F
38s

Correct Localization Time
Fastest
Slowest Average
5.6s
7.1s
5.8s
6.5s
F
F
4.9s
7.9s
F
F
F
F
4.9s
7.9s
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
6.6s
7.5s
4.7s
6.7s
25s
34s
8.4s
12s
4.9s
7.9s
5.2s
6.6s
F
F
7.8s
9.5s
F
F
10s
14.5s
7.6s
11.4s
7.3s
11.5s
15.1s
19.5s
5.3s
5.7s
F
F
F
F
5.3s
6.2s
F
F
F
F

F
11.2s

29.5s
9.2s

9.4s
16.8s

5.9s
F

25s
F

36s
F

5.4s

5.7s

5.8s

8.6s

9.2s

RMSE

0.14m

0.17m
F

0.27m

F
F

0.5m

F
F
F
1.05m

0.72m
0.42m

0.63m
0.71m

0.10m

0.45m
F

0.50m

F
0.65m

0.02m

0.3m
0.80m

0.41m

0.54m
F

0.95m

1.03m
F

Fig. 7. The laser scan matching result of waypoint #6 for two different initial
pose options. The green curve and red line denote the robot trajectory and
the real-time laser scan respectively, and the small RGB coordinates represent
the submap coordinate frames: (a) The occupancy grid map of the corridor
environment; (b) Localization without initial pose—Failed; (c) Localization
with initial location and orientation—Successful.

method [9], which is called Google Cartographer, is imple-
mented to build the 2-D occupancy grid map. The interpolated
magnetic ﬁeld map combined with the occupancy grid map of
the corridor environment is shown in Fig. 1. Three different
desired robot routes are conducted to cover as much area
of the corridor as possible. Each route goes around the
corridor environment in one clockwise circle and in another
one counter-clockwise circle. The width of the corridor in the
environment is around 2m and the interval between each route
is 38 cm.

C. Localization
Three different initial pose options are compared in the
localization part, which are: 1) Initial pose with location and
orientation; 2) Initial pose with only location; 3) Without
initial pose. For the second option, the orientation data is set
to default zero. For each initial pose option of each waypoint,
ten individual random trials are conducted.
The localization results of waypoint #6 is shown in Fig. 7
as an illustration of the successful and failed scenarios, where
”waypoint” is abbreviated as ”WP”. And the localization
success rate in this corridor environment is shown in Fig. 8.
The histograms represent the success rate for each initial pose
option at each waypoint. The lines represent the cumulative

Fig. 8. Localization success rate for different initial pose options

[14] E. Le Grand and S. Thrun, “3-axis magnetic ﬁeld mapping and fusion
for indoor localization,” in Multisensor Fusion and Integration for
Intelligent Systems (MFI), 2012 IEEE Conference on.
IEEE, 2012,
pp. 358–364.
[15] M. Frassl, M. Angermann et al., “Magnetic maps of indoor environments
for precise localization of legged and non-legged locomotion,” in 2013
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS).
IEEE, 2013, pp. 913–920.
[16] S. Kohlbrecher, O. Von Stryk et al., “A ﬂexible and scalable SLAM
system with full 3D motion estimation,” in 2011 IEEE International
Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics.
IEEE, 2011, pp.
155–160.
[17] S. Agarwal, K. Mierle et al., “Ceres solver,” 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://ceres- solver.org/
[18] K. Konolige, G. Grisetti et al., “Efﬁcient sparse pose adjustment for 2D
mapping,” in 2010 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2010, pp. 22–29.
[19] J. Clausen, “Branch and bound algorithms-principles and examples,”
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, pp. 1–30,
1999.

V. CONCLUS IONS

This paper presents a magnetic-assisted initialization ap-
proach to enhance the performance of infrastructure-free mo-
bile robot localization in repetitive featureless environments.
The fusion of magnetic ﬁeld-based matching and laser scan
matching is realized in the proposed system. The initial pose of
the mobile robot is partly determined by the k-NN algorithm.
Then with the fusion of prior initial pose information, the
mobile robot is localized by laser scan matching more accu-
rately and efﬁciently. The experimental results indicate that
the proposed initial pose option has the highest localization
success rate of 88% while the option with only location infor-
mation and the option without any initial information achieve
an average success rate of 35% and 40% respectively. And
the RMSE of the proposed method is 1.43 m. The proposed
approach has demonstrated a signiﬁcant improvement on robot
localization robustness and efﬁciency, especially for repetitive
featureless environments. Future development work will focus
on developing better magnetic ﬁeld modeling methods in order
to provide more accurate initial information for mobile robot
localization.

R E FERENC E S

[1] S. Suksakulchai, S. Thongchai, D. M. Wilkes, and K. Kawamura,
“Mobile robot localization using an electronic compass for corridor
environment,” in IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, vol. 5.
IEEE, 2000, pp. 3354–3359.
[2] J. Haverinen and A. Kemppainen, “Global indoor self-localization based
on the ambient magnetic ﬁeld,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems,
vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 1028–1035, 2009.
[3] B. Li, T. Gallagher et al., “How feasible is the use of magnetic ﬁeld alone
for indoor positioning?” in Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation
(IPIN), 2012 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–9.
[4] B. Gozick, K. P. Subbu, R. Dantu, and T. Maeshiro, “Magnetic maps
for indoor navigation,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and
Measurement, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 3883–3891, 2011.
[5] M. Angermann, M. Frassl et al., “Characterization of the indoor mag-
netic ﬁeld for applications in localization and mapping,” in Indoor Po-
sitioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), 2012 International Conference
on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–9.
[6] I. Vallivaara, J. Haverinen, A. Kemppainen, and J. R ¨oning, “Magnetic
ﬁeld-based SLAM method for solving the localization problem in mobile
robot ﬂoor-cleaning task,” in Advanced Robotics (ICAR), 2011 15th
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 198–203.
[7] J. Jung, S.-M. Lee, and H. Myung, “Indoor mobile robot localization and
mapping based on ambient magnetic ﬁelds and aiding radio sources,”
IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 64, no. 7,
pp. 1922–1934, 2015.
[8] Y. Yue, D. Wang, P. Senarathne, and D. Moratuwage, “A hybrid proba-
bilistic and point set registration approach for fusion of 3D occupancy
grid maps,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics, Oct 2016, pp. 1975–1980.
[9] W. Hess, D. Kohler, H. Rapp, and D. Andor, “Real-time loop closure
in 2D LIDAR SLAM,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1271–1278.
[10] Y. Yue, C. Yang, Y. Wang, P. G. C. N. Senarathne, J. Zhang, M. Wen,
and D. Wang, “A multi-level fusion system for multi-robot 3D mapping
using heterogeneous sensors,” IEEE Systems Journal, 2019.
[11] Y. Yue, P. G. C. N. Senarathne, C. Yang, J. Zhang, M. Wen, and
D. Wang, “Hierarchical probabilistic fusion framework for matching
and merging of 3-D occupancy maps,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 18,
no. 21, pp. 8933–8949, Nov 2018.
[12] Y. Li, Z. He et al., “Using Wi-Fi/magnetometers for indoor location
and personal navigation,” in 2015 International Conference on Indoor
Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–7.
[13] V. Pasku, A. De Angelis et al., “Magnetic ﬁeld-based positioning
systems,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 2003–2017, 2017.

