9
1
0
2

v
o

N

1
2

]

G

L

.

s

c

[

1
v
7
2
4
9
0

.

1
1
9
1

:

v

i

X

r

a

Accurate Hydrologic Modeling Using Less
Information

Guy Shalev∗

Ran El-Yaniv∗ †

Daniel Klotz‡

guysha@google.com

rani@cs.technion.ac.il

klotz@ml.jku.at

Frederik Kratzert ‡

Asher Metzger∗

Sella Nevo∗

kratzert@ml.jku.at

ashermetzger@google.com

sellanevo@google.com

Abstract

Joint models are a common and important tool in the intersection of machine
learning and the physical sciences, particularly in contexts where real-world mea-
surements are scarce. Recent developments in rainfall-runoff modeling, one of
the prime challenges in hydrology, show the value of a joint model with shared
representation in this important context. However, current state-of-the-art mod-
els depend on detailed and reliable attributes characterizing each site to help the
model differentiate correctly between the behavior of different sites. This depen-
dency can present a challenge in data-poor regions. In this paper, we show that we
can replace the need for such location-speciﬁc attributes with a completely data-
driven learned embedding, and match previous state-of-the-art results with less
information.

1 Introduction

The prediction of hydrologic processes is critical for utilizing and protecting against the immense
impacts of water on human life. These impacts can include mitigating the effect of ﬂoods, which
are responsible for thousands of fatalities and billions of dollars in economic damages annually,
improving agriculture, which is responsible for the livelihood of a signiﬁcant portion of humanity,
and more. Hydrologic models allow for simulating and forecasting various water ﬂow properties
(most often streamﬂow) based on more easily measurable inputs (most notably precipitation).

However, despite their economic and humanitarian importance, reliable hydrologic models remain
a challenge in developing countries, mainly due to poor quality or unavailability of data. Our goal
is to bridge this gap and enable effective hydrologic modeling at scale in data-scarce regions. In this
paper we present a hydrologic model that works with partial data – while retaining state-of-the-art
performance.

Classical hydrologic models (referred to by hydrologists as “conceptual models”) are based on equa-
tions that describe the physics of the rainfall-runoff process. Traditionally, the parameters of these
models are optimized separately for each geographic location (a.k.a. “site” or “basin”) using site-
speciﬁc data [3]. Attempts to construct a conceptual model applicable to many sites (a.k.a. “regional”
or “joint” model) typically achieve signiﬁcantly inferior performance [9, 10, 7].

Recently, Kratzert et al. [7] used a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network to create a single
(regional) hydrologic model for hundreds of sites from the extensive CAMELS hydrologic dataset

Second Workshop on Machine Learning and the Physical Sciences (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

∗Google Research
†Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
‡LIT AI Lab & Institute for Machine Learning, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria

 
 
 
 
 
 
[13, 1] – the single LSTM-based model was trained on the combined input data from hundreds
of sites to predict the streamﬂow data in all of these basins. Their regional LSTM model – when
equipped with basin-speciﬁc attribute features (such as altitude and aridity) – signiﬁcantly outper-
formed all of the prominent conceptual models – both regional models and models that were cal-
ibrated per basin. This important result proves that a joint machine learning model approach is
promising compared to the single site approach that suffers from inherent data shortage.

When considering hydrologic modeling in developing world regions, data scarcity is a major con-
cern. Shorter or irregular discharge records prevent the creation of accurate site-speciﬁc models,
emphasizing the necessity of the joint modeling approach which allows the transfer knowledge be-
tween the tasks of predicting for different basins. The state-of-the-art results achieved by Kratzert
et al.’s [7] joint model strongly depend on site speciﬁc static attributes (e.g., soil characteristics),
that help the model to effectively utilize the abundance of diverse data provided from aggregating
hundreds of sites, while retaining the ability to differentiate between the hydrologic response of dif-
ferent locations. Unfortunately, their approach is not directly applicable in the developing world,
where some of these basin attributes are of poor quality and require signiﬁcant efforts in curating the
relevant datasets 4 . Therefore, obtaining good performance without relying on these attributes is an
important step towards scalable and accurate hydrologic modeling in developing countries.

In this paper we present a joint hydrologic model that does not rely on any site static features. We
replace these features by a site embedding layer, similar to the word-embedding technique used in
language models [8]. Our empirical study over the CAMELS dataset validates this approach and
clearly demonstrates that the proposed model replicates state-of-the-art performance with less in-
formation. This success can be interpreted as our model’s ability to learn the speciﬁc hydrologic
response of each site directly from the meteorologic and streamﬂow dynamics at comparable effec-
tiveness to its ability to learn that response from static basin attributes (see a detailed discussion in
Section 5).

2 Model Architecture and Optimization

We train a single (regional) LSTM on the combined data of hundreds of sites to predict the mean
discharge of a single day, given the history of the meteorological input features of the previous 270
days. To allow a fair comparison, our model setting is similar to the LSTM setup described in detail
in [7]: a single layer, 256 memory cells and a single fully connected layer with a droupout rate of
0.4.

We consider two types of input features:

• Meteorologic time series data at a daily resolution (such as daily basin-averaged precipita-
tion and temperature).

• Static features (e.g., basin size, fraction of sand in the soil), representing attributes that are
constant for each site.

For every timestep t = 1, ..., 270 we feed the model with dynamic data from day t, and produce a
prediction of the daily discharge mean at day t = 270.

In experiments where static features are used, they are concatenated to the dynamic inputs at each
time step. In experiments where our proposed site embedding is used, the embedding is a vector
vi ∈ Rk (for some hyperparameter k ), that is learned during training for each site i = 1, ..., n.
The embedding vector is concatenated at every time step, similarly to the static features it aims to
substitute. In the reported results, we use k = 20 as the embedding dimension.

All input features (both static and dynamic) and labels were standardized (zero mean, unit variance).

Our loss function is the basin averaged Nash-Sutcliffe Efﬁciency (see Section 4), with a constant
term in the denominator to allow robustness of the optimization to catchments with very low ﬂow-
variance. A detailed discussion of this loss function is available in [7].

4Datasets similar to CAMELS have only been produced for few other regions - Chile, Great Britain and
Australia (e.g., [2])

2

3 The NCAR CAMELS Dataset

As mentioned earlier, to be able to benchmark our model against all models presented in the work
of Kratzert et al. [7], we aspired to work in a setting as similar as possible to theirs in terms of
features, hyperparameters, etc. We therefore work with the CAMELS dataset, which consists of 671
basins across the Contiguous United States (CONUS). We use ﬁve dynamic features provided in the
dataset, which are the daily, basin-averaged Maurer meteorologic forcings [14]. These include: (i)
precipitation, (ii) minimum air temperature, (iii) maximum air temperature, (iv) average short-wave
radiation and (v) vapor pressure. As static features, we also utilize the same 27 basin attributes listed
in the appendix of [7]. The time periods for all experiments are compatible with the benchmarks:
Oct. 1999 to Sep. 2008 for training (9 full years) and Oct. 1989 to Sep. 1999 for evaluation
(10 full years). The daily mean discharge labels are measurements published by the United States
Geological Survey (USGS). Our model is trained and evaluated on 528 sites out of the 531 that were
used in Kratzert’s paper – three sites were excluded due to data parsing issues before modeling.

4 Performance Metrics

The Nash-Sutcliffe Efﬁciency (NSE, Nash & Sutcliffe, 1970) [11] is the most common metric in
hydrology for the evaluation of rainfall-runoff models for single sites. It is deﬁned as the R2 between
the simulated and observed discharge:

1 −

PT
PT

t=1 (Qm [t] − Qo [t])2
t=1 (Qo [t] − ¯Qo )2

Where for every example t = 1, 2, . . . , T , we denote Qm [t] the modeled discharge and Qo [t] the
observed discharge at time t. ¯Qo is the mean observed discharge. This is equivalent to the MSE
normalized by the variance, and then subtracted from 1. Note that possible ranges of the metric are
(− inf , 1], with 1 obtained for perfect simulation and 0 for the model that constantly predicts the
mean observed discharge for the site.

We compute the NSE for each of the sites on the joint model’s predictions. We then aggregate them
into the 3 central metrics benchmarked on the CAMELS dataset: median NSE, mean NSE, and
number of sites with negative NSE score (i.e., worse than predicting the mean).

5 Results and Discussion

The main results of our experiments are presented in Table 1 along with the results obtained in [7]
that are relevant for comparison.

Table 1: Evaluation of the models on the CAMELS test dataset

Model

NSE
No. of basins
mean median with NSE ≤ 0

LSTM w/o static inputs5
LSTM with static inputs5
LSTM w/o static inputs, with embedding
LSTM with static inputs, with embedding

0.39
0.69
0.69
0.70

0.59
0.73
0.73
0.73

28
2
1
2

From the results presented in Table 1 we conclude that replacing static attributes with site embedding
is a viable approach for regional modeling, achieving almost identical performance on the measured
metrics. One potential explanation for this convergence is that the dynamics of the temporal features
(and labels) provided to the model are rich and indicative enough to enable the model to fully identify
the relevant information within the static features – at least when the historical record is long enough
(9 years of daily data in our case).

5Results reported in [7]

3

The last row in Table 1 is consistent with this hypothesis. Despite both the static inputs and the
site embedding providing a signiﬁcant improvement over the model without static inputs, providing
both of these tools to the model does not improve its performance.

Note that both the static features and the site embedding can be useful tools in addressing different
types of in-availability of data. Clearly, in the theoretical scenario of inﬁnite historical training data6 ,
one would expect the embedding to perform better than static attributes – the provided attributes are
sometimes noisy estimations of the actual values they represent (e.g. due to measuring errors), and
also do not incorporate all the site-speciﬁc information that can be helpful for the model and avail-
able from the data (e.g., the mean and variance of the discharge values). At the other extreme,
when tasked with predicting discharge at a site with no discharge measurements at all (prediction
in “ungauged basins” [4]), the embedding approach is inapplicable, but the basin attributes are still
useful – as explored in [6]. We therefore see both approaches as being of signiﬁcant and comple-
mentary value. An interesting question for future research would be how many samples (per site)
are necessary to learn a good embedding representation, clarifying the constraints of each approach.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we have shown that state-of-the-art results can be matched without relying on additional
information which can be of poor quality or difﬁcult to curate in many regions.

We view these results as an important milestone in the path to real world, scalable ﬂood forecasting
applications in the developing world, as detailed in Nevo et al. [12]. We believe this goal is critical
not only from a scientiﬁc point of view, but also from a humanitarian perspective. The vast majority
of the thousands of annual ﬂood-related fatalities occur in developing countries, where data quality
and availability are a critical issue.

A natural next step is to explore the effectiveness of this approach when applied directly to severely
affected developing countries such as India, Bangladesh and more. This type of research has signif-
icant challenges – including access to the data necessary for both prediction and evaluation – but is
critical in converting these and similar results into actual real-world impact.

There are several other research directions that arise from our results. Possible future work could
focus on examining the interpretability of the embedding layer – for example, predicting various
basin attributes (e.g., altitude or soil characteristics) directly from the embedding, or analyzing the
clustering of sites with similar embeddings with relation to other clustering works on the CAMELS
sites [5, 7].

We believe the ﬂexibility of joint-model, data-driven approaches can help overcome many chal-
lenges that arise from data constraints. Some of these challenges are not effectively addressed by
classic tools, while others are well-handled by conceptual models and would be of value to import
to machine learning based models. Examples of these include:

• Aggregation of many meteorological inputs. There exist a signiﬁcant number of precipita-
tion products, which clearly contain more information than any one of them separately. Ma-
chine learning based hydrologic models can utilize several products simultaneously without
the need to explicitly combine them into one precipitation estimate.

• Using non-standard labels such as water level. Reliable water level measurements are much
more commonly available than discharge measurements, yet conceptual models do not
model these well because they do not follow simple conservation laws. Data-driven ap-
proaches are very well-placed to implicitly identify the correlations between discharge and
water level, and can therefore utilize these better both as input and as labels.

• Utilising upstream measurements and forecasts. Classic approaches use routing models to
utilize upstream measurement in a fairly straightforward manner, but incorporating these
into machine learning models raises many interesting architectural questions.

• Severe data scarcity. Dealing with small training sets is a core area of research in machine
learning, and is extremely relevant to this space where the real-world impact of a model

6This also requires the assumption that the training data and test data are identically distributed, an assump-
tion we know is never perfectly fulﬁlled in a real-world physical system.

4

tends to correlate strongly with the lack of data available (due to developing countries both
lacking data collection infrastructure, while depending more on these models for basic
needs in safety and agriculture).

• Utilization of site attributes when those are available. These attributes are hard to incorpo-
rate efﬁciently into conceptual models.

The above present both challenges and opportunities for the hydrology and machine learning com-
munities, and we hope further collaborations between these two disciplines will produce signiﬁcant
results, both academically and operationally.

References

[1] Nans Addor, Andrew J. Newman, Naoki Mizukami, and Martyn P. Clark. The CAMELS
data set: catchment attributes and meteorology for large-sample studies. Hydrology and Earth
System Sciences, 21(10):5293–5313, oct 2017.

[2] Camila Alvarez-Garreton, Pablo A Mendoza, Juan P Boisier, Nans Addor, Mauricio Gal-
leguillos, Mauricio Zambrano-Bigiarini, Antonio Lara, Gonzalo Cortes, Rene Garreaud, James
McPhee, et al. The camels-cl dataset: catchment attributes and meteorology for large sample
studies-chile dataset. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 22(11):5817–5846, 2018.

[3] Keith J" "Beven. "Rainfall-runoff modelling: the primer". "John Wiley & Sons", "2011".

[4] Günter Blöschl, Murugesu Sivapalan, Hubert Savenije, Thorsten Wagener, and Alberto
Viglione. Runoff prediction in ungauged basins: synthesis across processes, places and scales.
Cambridge University Press, 2013.

[5] Florian Jehn, Konrad Bestian, Lutz Breuer, Philipp Kraft, and Tobias Houska. Clustering
camels using hydrological signatures with high spatial predictability. Hydrology and Earth
System Sciences Discussions, 04 2019.

[6] Frederik Kratzert, Daniel Klotz, Alden K Sampson, Sepp Hochreiter, Grey Nearing, et al.
Prediction in ungauged basins with long short-term memory networks, 2019.

[7] Frederik Kratzert, Daniel Klotz, Guy Shalev, Günter Klambauer, Sepp Hochreiter, and Grey
Nearing. Benchmarking a Catchment-Aware Long Short-Term Memory Network (LSTM) for
Large-Scale Hydrological Modeling. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences Discussions, pages
1–32, aug 2019.

[8] Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. Distributed repre-
sentations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 3111–3119, 2013.

[9] Naoki Mizukami, Martyn P Clark, Andrew J Newman, Andrew W Wood, Ethan D Gutmann,
Bart Nijssen, Oldrich Rakovec, and Luis Samaniego. Towards seamless large-domain parame-
ter estimation for hydrologic models. Water Resources Research, 53(9):8020–8040, 2017.

[10] Naoki Mizukami, Oldrich Rakovec, Andrew J Newman, Martyn P Clark, Andrew W Wood,
Hoshin V Gupta, and Rohini Kumar. On the choice of calibration metrics for “high-ﬂow”
estimation using hydrologic models. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 23(6):2601–2614,
2019.

[11] J Eamonn Nash and Jonh V Sutcliffe. River ﬂow forecasting through conceptual models part
i—a discussion of principles. Journal of hydrology, 10(3):282–290, 1970.

[12] Sella Nevo, Vova Anisimov, Gal Elidan, Ran El-Yaniv, Pete Giencke, Yotam Gigi, Avinatan
Hassidim, Zach Moshe, Mor Schlesinger, Guy Shalev, Ajai Tirumali, Ami Wiesel, Oleg Zly-
denko, and Yossi Matias. ML for ﬂood forecasting at scale. CoRR, abs/1901.09583, 2019.

[13] A. J. Newman, M. P. Clark, K. Sampson, A. Wood, L. E. Hay, A. Bock, R. J. Viger, D. Blodgett,
L. Brekke, J. R. Arnold, T. Hopson, and Q. Duan. Development of a large-sample watershed-
scale hydrometeorological data set for the contiguous usa: data set characteristics and assess-
ment of regional variability in hydrologic model performance. Hydrology and Earth System
Sciences, 19(1):209–223, 2015.

[14] Andrew W Wood, Edwin P Maurer, Arun Kumar, and Dennis P Lettenmaier. Long-range exper-
imental hydrologic forecasting for the eastern united states. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Atmospheres, 107(D20):ACL–6, 2002.

5

