Feedback Motion Planning for Long-Range
Autonomous Underwater Vehicles

Opeyemi S. Orioke1 , Tauhidul Alam1 , Joseph Quinn1 , Ramneek Kaur1 ,
Wesam H. Alsabban2, Leonardo Bobadilla3 , and Ryan N. Smith4

9
1
0
2

v
o

N

1
2

]

O

R

.

s

c

[

1
v
1
8
5
9
0

.

1
1
9
1

:

v

i

X

r

a

Abstract—Ocean ecosystems have spatiotemporal variability
and dynamic complexity that require a long-term deployment
of an autonomous underwater vehicle for data collection. A
new long-range autonomous underwater vehicle called Tethys is
adapted to study different oceanic phenomena. Additionally, an
ocean environment has external forces and moments along with
changing water currents which are generally not considered in
a vehicle kinematic model. In this scenario, it is not enough to
generate a simple trajectory from an initial location to a goal
location in an uncertain ocean as the vehicle can deviate from its
intended trajectory. As such, we propose to compute a feedback
plan that adapts the vehicle trajectory in the presence of any
modeled or unmodeled uncertainties. In this work, we present
a feedback motion planning method for the Tethys vehicle by
combining a predictive ocean model and its kinematic modeling.
Given a goal
location, the Tethys kinematic model, and the
water ﬂow pattern, our method computes a feedback plan for
the vehicle in a dynamic ocean environment that reduces its
energy consumption. The computed feedback plan provides the
optimal action for the Tethys vehicle to take from any location
of the environment to reach the goal
location considering its
orientation. Our results based on actual ocean model prediction
data demonstrate the applicability of our method.

I .

INTRODUCT ION

Ocean ecosystems are complex and have high variability
in both time and space. Consequently, ocean scientists must
collect data over long time periods to obtain a synoptic view of
ocean ecosystems and resolve their spatiotemporal variability.
On the other hand, autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs)
are increasingly being used for studying different phenomena
in ocean ecosystems such as oil spill mapping [1], harmful
algal blooms [2], phytoplankton and zooplankton communi-
ties [3], and coral bleaching [4]. These AUVs are classiﬁed into
two categories: (i) propeller-driven vehicles such as Dorado
that can move fast and gather numerous sensor observations;
and (ii) minimally-actuated vehicles such as Drifters, Proﬁling
ﬂoats, and Gliders that can remain on deployment for long
time periods, ranging from many days to many weeks.

1 O. S. Orioke, T. Alam, J. Quinn, and R. Kaur are with the Department of
Mathematics, Computer and Information Science, SUNY Old Westbury, NY
11568, USA. (e-mail: {oorioke, alamt, jquinn14, rkau23}@oldwestbury.edu)
2 W. H. Alsabban is with the Computer and Information Systems, Umm
Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia. (e-mail: whsabban@uqu.edu.sa)
3 L. Bobadilla is with the School of Computing and Information Sci-
ences, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA. (e-mail:
bobadilla@cs.ﬁu.edu)
4 R. N. Smith is with the Department of Physics and Engineering, Fort
Lewis College, Durango, CO 81301, USA. (e-mail: rnsmith@fortlewis.edu)

Fig. 1. Two Tethys vehicles observing the oceanic environments [5], [6].

Therefore, one option to perform persistent ocean obser-
vation is to utilize minimally-actuated underwater vehicles.
However, such vehicles do not have the capabilities to control
their actuation, and they move slowly with water currents. Fur-
thermore, these minimally-actuated vehicles cannot navigate
through water currents properly while executing a prescribed
path or mission due to their limited actuation capabilities.
Another option for ocean monitoring is to use propeller-driven
AUVs. Nonetheless, their mission endurance is limited to only
a few days, and they consume a lot of energy for actuation.
A new breed of the long-range autonomous underwater
vehicle (LRAUV) called Tethys combines the advantages of
both minimally-actuated and propeller-driven AUVs [7]. The
Tethys AUV can move quickly for hundreds of kilometers,
ﬂoat with water currents, and carry a broad range of sensors for
data collection. It can also control its buoyancy for changing
depths in the water and the angle at which it moves through the
water. Most importantly, this vehicle can be deployed in the
water for weeks at a time. Two examples of deployed Tethys
AUVs to observe oceans are shown in Fig. 1. A planning
and control technique for this vehicle is critical to increase
its autonomy and generate mission trajectories during long-
range operations. The execution of a planned trajectory for
this vehicle is also challenging due to the variability and
uncertainty of ocean currents. Thus, it is not enough to generate
a simple navigation trajectory from an initial location to a
goal location in a dynamic ocean environment with unmodeled
uncertainties as the vehicle can deviate from its trajectory. In
other words, this navigation trajectory suffers from simulation
bias as there is no sensor feedback during the trajectory
implementation.
As such, we consider the use of feedback motion planning
for the Tethys vehicle by combining a predictive ocean model
and its kinematic modeling. It is also not possible to model all
the uncertainties of a dynamic ocean such as gravity, buoyancy,

 
 
 
 
 
 
hydrodynamic and other uncertain forces and moments. Hence,
the motivation for our feedback motion planning based method
is to compute a feedback plan. A feedback plan is computed
over the entire state space of a vehicle, so the vehicle can
adapt its trajectory from any deviated state in the presence of
any noise or modeling errors. Furthermore, this feedback plan
is crucial when the initial state of an AUV in a trajectory is
unknown as the plan indicates what action to take from every
state.
Statement of contributions: In this work, ﬁrst, we develop
a kinematic model of the Tethys and generate ﬂow ﬁelds
from ocean model predictions. Then, we present a method to
compute a feedback plan from the Tethys kinematic model
and the water ﬂow pattern that drives the vehicle from any
location to the goal location in a dynamic ocean environment
and reduces its energy consumption.

I I . RE LAT ED WORK

The feedback mission control of autonomous underwater ve-
hicles in dynamic and spatiotemporal underwater environments
has attracted a great deal of interest. A feedback trajectory
tracking scheme was developed for an AUV in a dynamic
environment like an ocean with the presence of several mod-
eled and unmodeled uncertainties [8]. In [9], an informative
feedback plan was generated for AUVs to visit essential
locations by estimating Kriging Errors from spatiotemporal
ﬁelds. In this method, a feedback plan was calculated via the
Markov Decision Model (MDP) based problem formulation.
A ﬁnite state automata based supervisory feedback control
was presented in [10] for obstacle avoidance by an AUV.
A temporal plan was calculated in [11] for AUV mission
control that optimizes the time taken to complete a single
inspection tour. In [11], a feedback and replanning framework
was integrated along with the temporal plan in the Robot
Operating System (ROS). In [12], Sampling Based Model
Predictive Control (SBMPC) is utilized to simultaneously
generate control inputs and feasible trajectories for an AUV
in the presence of a number of nonlinear constraints.
Open-loop trajectory design methods [13], [14] drive a AUV
from a given initial location to the desired goal location mini-
mizing a cost in terms of energy and time taken by the vehicle.
The implementation of open-loop trajectories for AUVs work
well in environments without any model uncertainties. In our
previous work [15], we proposed an open-loop approach for
solving the problem of deploying a set of minimally-actuated
drifters for persistent monitoring of an aquatic environment.
In our recent work [16], we predicted the localized trajectory
of a drifter for a sequence of compass observations during its
deployment in a marine environment. We presented a closed-
loop approach in [16] when an AUV has a considerable
unpredictability of executing its action in a dynamic marine
environment. Moreover, the previous studies [7], [17] on the
Tethys AUV described the mission and other capabilities of
the vehicle. However, there is no work on the development
of a planning algorithm for controlling the vehicle. In this
work, we utilize the Tethys vehicle’s sensor feedback to control
its mission operation taking into account its several drifting

and actuation capabilities as well as minimizing its energy
consumption.

I I I . MODE L AND PROBL EM D E FIN IT ION

In this section, we present the kinematic model for the
Tethys vehicle in a representation of an environment and
formulate our problem of interest.

A. Model Deﬁnition
We consider a 3-D environment where a workspace is an
ocean environment denoted as W ⊂ R3 . The workspace is
divided into a set of 2-D water current layers at different depths
of the environment which represents the third dimension. Let L
be the total number of water current layers in the environment.
Hence, the workspace can be deﬁned as W = W1 ∪ W2 ∪
· · · ∪ WL . At each current layer, we model the workspace
Wl ⊂ R2 , where l ∈ {1, . . . , L}, as a polygonal environment.
Let Ol ⊂ R2 be the land and littoral region of the environment
at each layer which is considered an inaccessible region for the
vehicle. The free-water space at each current layer is composed
of all navigable locations for the vehicle, and it is deﬁned as
El = Wl \ Ol . The free water space in the whole workspace
is denoted by E = E1 ∪ E2 ∪ · · · ∪ EL .
We discretize each workspace layer Wl as a 2-D grid.
Each grid point or location, denoted as q , has a geographic
coordinate in the form of longitude, latitude, and depth q =

(xt , yt , lt ), where xt , yt ∈ R and lt ∈ {1, . . . , L}. The

geographic coordinate of each q represents the center of an
equal-sized grid location. The state space for the vehicle is
deﬁned as X = E × S 1 in which S 1 is the set of angles
in [0, 2π) that represents the vehicle’s orientations. A state
of the vehicle in the state space is indexed by a cell index
z ∈ {1, . . . , N }, where N represents the total number of cells
in X . A cell in the state space is represented as z = (q , θ)
in which q denotes the vehicle position, and θ provides the
vehicle orientation. Let Z = {1, . . . , N } denote the set of all
cells in the state space. Let xG ∈ X be a goal state or location
of the vehicle at any water current layer of the environment.

B. Problem Formulation

We consider the unicycle motion model for the Tethys
vehicle.
In our vehicle motion model, we assume that
the Tethys can drift
taking advantage of water currents,
actuate to move forward with or against currents, rotate
left and right in the same location, glide up and down by
transitioning between two water current layers as illustrated
in Fig. 2. We also incorporate noise and uncertainty
in the vehicle’s movement
to account
for
the modeling
error and unmodeled dynamics. Hence,
the action set
of
the vehicle in the underwater environment
{drift, move forward, rotate left, rotate right, up, down}.
Each action u ∈ U has an energy cost associated with
it which is denoted as cu .
In particular, we consider
cdrift < cglide < cforward < crotate for different actions of the
Tethys vehicle. Let
the cost set for consuming energy in
executing different actions by the Tethys vehicle be C . A

is U =

layer  l-1

layer  l

layer  l+1

Fig. 2. A glider is moving up and down by transitioning between two water
current layers [18].

feedback plan π is deﬁned as a function π : X → U which
produces an action u = π(x) ∈ U (x), for any state x ∈ X , to
reach the goal state xG . When the vehicle does not know its
initial state, it is appropriate to ﬁnd a feedback plan that maps
every state to an action. A feedback plan is called a solution
to the problem if it causes the goal state to be reached from
every state in X . This motivates us to formulate the following
problem.
Problem 1. Computing a feedback plan for an LRAUV:
Given an ocean environment E , the action set of the Tethys
vehicle U , the vehicle motion model, the water ﬂow pattern,
and a goal location xG , compute a feedback plan π that drives
the vehicle for any location of the environment to reach the
goal location xG minimizing the energy cost.

IV. M E THOD

In this section, we detail our method for solving the problem
formulated in Section III.

A. Data Acquisition

We use the Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS) [19]
predicted oceanic current data in the Southern California Bight
(SCB) region, CA, USA, as illustrated in Fig. 3, which is
contained within 33◦17′60′′ N to 33◦42′ N and −117◦42′
E to −118◦15′36′′ E. ROMS is a free-surface, split-explicit,
terrain-following, nested-grid mode, and an extensively used
ocean model. ROMS is also an open-source ocean model that is
widely accepted and supported throughout the oceanographic
and modeling communities. Furthermore, the model was de-
veloped to study ocean processes along the western U.S. coast
which is our area of interest. The four dimensions of 4-D
ROMS current velocity prediction data are longitude, latitude,
depth, and time. The ROMS current velocity prediction data
are given at depths from 0 m to 125 m and with 24 hours
forecast for each day. The three velocity components of
oceanic currents are northing current (α), easting current (β ),
and vertical current (γ ). These velocity components are given
based on the four dimensions (time, depth, longitude, and
latitude). We use velocity prediction data of water currents
at depths between 0 m and 15 m for a speciﬁc time.

Fig. 3. The area of interest in the SCB region, California.

B. Generating the Water Flow Pattern

We create ﬂow ﬁelds at several water current layers from the
ROMS ocean current prediction data. Ocean current velocity
prediction data for a speciﬁc time and at a particular water
current layer can be represented as a ﬂow ﬁeld. Let the ﬂow
ﬁeld on a location q at a particular water current layer of the
environment El be F (q). For a location q at a particular water
current layer, the easting velocity component along the latitude
axis is denoted by α(q), the northing velocity component along
the longitude axis is denoted by β (q), and the vertical velocity
component at that water current layer is denoted by γ (q). The
ﬂow ﬁeld based on three velocity components for a location q
at that water current layer is speciﬁed as:

F (q) = [α(q), β (q), γ (q)].

(1)

The vertical velocity component of the ocean current γ (q) at
all water current layers is considered zero. Thus, we create ﬂow
ﬁelds for all water current layers. Then, we ﬁnd ﬂow lines of
the water ﬂow from these ﬂow ﬁelds. Flow lines of the water
ﬂow over the ﬂow ﬁeld F are the trajectories or paths traveled
by an omnidirectional vehicle at the given water current layer
whose velocity ﬁeld is the ﬂow ﬁeld.
To ﬁnd the water ﬂow pattern, we need all ﬂow lines from
locations at different water current layers for a small time step
∆t so that we can map one location to another based on these
ﬂow lines. To calculate the next mapped location z (∆t) after
a small time interval ∆t from each initial location at time zero
z (0), we use the Euler integration method as follows:

q(∆t) = q(0) + ∆t F (q(0)).

(2)

It gives the endpoint of the ﬂow line from the initial location
q after the small time ∆t. After that, we use the Euclidean
distance for locating the nearest location from this endpoint.
This nearest location q ′ becomes the next mapped location of
the initial location q . Following this process, we obtain all ﬂow
lines for the small time step ∆t at each water current layer.
Finally, we get the next mapped location for each location in
the environment E at all water current layers.

Algorithm 1: COM PUT EFE EDBACKPLAN (E , F, U, C, xG )
Input: E , F, U, C, xG – Environment, ﬂow ﬁelds, action
set, cost set, goal state
Output: π – A feedback plan

1 G.V ← ∅, G.E ← ∅,

π ← ∅

2 for i ← 1 to N do

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

z ← i

q , θ ← CE L LSTAT E(z )
q ′ ← MA P P EDCE L L(q , F )

θw ← WAT ERFLOWD IRECT ION(q , q ′ )
s ← A L IGNMENTSCORE(θ, θw )

for j ← 1 to |U | do
Z ′ ← MA P P EDCE L L S(s, θ, q) // Add uncertainty

G.V ← G.V ∪ Z ′
G.E ← G.E ∪ {(z , z ′) | z ′ ∈ Z ′}
∀z ′ ∈ Z ′ : w(z , z ′ ) ← cj

13 for k ← 1 to N do

14

15

τ ← SHORT E S TPATH(G, xk , xG )
π(xk ) ← COM PUT EACT ION(τ )

16 return π

C. Computing a Feedback Plan

In this step, we compute a feedback plan for an LRAUV.
To obtain the feedback plan, Algorithm 1 takes as input the
environment E , ﬂow ﬁelds F , the action set U , the cost set C ,
and a goal state xG . It returns a feedback plan π . Let the water
ﬂow direction be θw . We deﬁne the vehicle’s alignment score
s with respect to the water ﬂow direction. Let the shortest
path for the vehicle be τ : [0, 1] → X such that τ (0) = xI ,
τ (1) = xG . A directed graph is deﬁned as G = (V , E ), where
each vertex v ∈ V represents a state x of the vehicle and an
edge (v , v ′ ) ∈ E , where v , v ′ ∈ V , represents a state transition
from one state x ∈ X to another state x′ ∈ X . We deﬁne the
weight function w : E → N+ that assigns the non-negative
edge weight.
From each cell z ∈ Z , Algorithm 1 ﬁnds the geographic
location q and the vehicle orientation θ (line 4). From this
geographic location q , it obtains the next prospective location
q ′ using the ﬂow ﬁelds F (line 5). Next, we calculate the
water ﬂow direction θw from the previous location q and the
new location q ′ (line 6). The angular distance ρ between θ and
θw is calculated as:

ρ(θ, θw ) = min(|θ − θw |, 2π − |θ − θw |),

(3)

for which θ, θw ∈ [0, 2π ]. As the movement of the vehicle will
depend on the vehicle’s alignment with respect to the water
ﬂow direction, we calculate the alignment score s between the
vehicle orientation θ and the water ﬂow direction θw for each
cell z (line 7) as follows:

s = ρ(θ, θw )/180.

(4)

The alignment score s for the vehicle ranges from 0 to 1.
Considering the vehicle’s uncertain motion, alignment score s,
the vehicle orientation θ, and the initial location q , it computes

the set of next mapped cells Z ′ , where Z ′ ⊂ Z , for each action
u ∈ U . In a boundary location of the environment, we include
the drifting action for the vehicle to move its position to one
of the neighboring locations. The set of next mapped cells Z ′
are added to the vertices and their ordered pairs (z , z ′), where
z ′ ∈ Z ′ , are included to the edges of the graph G. Each edge
(v , v ′ ) ∈ E represents a state transition to reach a vertex v ′
starting from a vertex v applying one action u ∈ U . The edge
weights are assigned according to the energy required for the
actions of the vehicle (lines 8 – 12).
Once we have the graph G, we apply a modiﬁed version of
the Dijkstra’s algorithm to ﬁnd the shortest path τ from a given
initial location to the goal location. The ﬁrst state transition in
the path τ will provide the best action for the vehicle to take
at the given initial location. Repeating the same process for all
the initial locations, we eventually compute a feedback plan
π that provides the optimal action for the Tethys vehicle to
take from any location of the environment to reach the goal
location xG (lines 13 – 15).

V. RE SULT S

We tested our method through simulations using the
ROMS [19] predicted ocean current data observed in the SCB
region. The 3-D ocean environment was taken into account as
the simulation environment for the Tethys movements having
three 2-D ocean surfaces at four different water current layers
or depths (e.g., 0 m, 5 m, 10 m, 15 m). Each 2-D ocean surface
is tessellated into a grid map. The resolution of the grid map
is 21 × 29. Four ﬂow ﬁelds from the ocean current data are
calculated at four water current layers of the environment as
shown in Fig. 4. The ﬂow lines of the ocean current data are
generated through the Euler numerical integration method from
all locations of the water surfaces for a small time ∆t which
is the time to pass a cell. A ﬂow line for a calculated ﬂow
ﬁeld from a particular location for all time t is illustrated in
Fig. 5.
We implemented Algorithm 1 to compute the feedback plan
for the Tethys vehicle considering its orientation. In our im-
plementation, we considered two grid tiles forward movement
along the orientation of the vehicle and two grid tiles drifting
or gliding movement along the water ﬂow direction when the
alignment score is s ≤ 0.2. In the case of the alignment score
0.2 < s ≤ 0.5, we considered one grid tile forward movement
along the orientation of the vehicle and one grid tile drifting
or gliding movement along the water ﬂow direction. In the
case of the alignment score s > 0.5, we considered in our
implementation that the vehicle does not change its position
rather ﬂoats at the current position. We also implemented the
in-place rotation of the vehicle by changing the vehicle orien-
tation 45◦ to the left (counterclockwise rotation) or 45◦ to the
right (clockwise rotation). The costs set in our implementation
for different actions of the vehicle are cdrift = 0, cglide = 2,
cforward = 4, and crotate = 10. A computed feedback plan
is shown in Fig. 6 that illustrates the best actions from all
locations of the environment when the vehicle’s orientation
is eastward at its initial deployment. A calculated navigation
trajectory between an initial location and a goal location in the

environment applying the computed feedback plan is illustrated
in Fig. 7.

−118.4

−118.2

−118

−117.8

−117.6

33.2

33.4

33.6

33.8

15
34

0

5

10

L o n g i

t u d e 

( d e g r e e s )

Latitude (degrees)

D

h
p
e

t

(

m

e
e

t

r

s

)

Fig. 4.
data [19].

Flow ﬁelds generated from ROMS oceanic current prediction

−118.4

−118.2

−118

−117.8

−117.6

33.2

33.4

33.6

33.8

15
34

0

5

10

L o n g i

t u d e 

( d e g r e e s )

Latitude (degrees)

D

h
p
e

t

(

m

e
e

t

r

s

)

Fig. 5. An example ﬂow line generated from ﬂow ﬁelds.

V I . CONCLU S ION AND FUTURE D IRECT ION

In this paper, we proposed a feedback motion planning
method by combining predicted water current data and the
Tethys vehicle kinematic model. The computed feedback plan
adapts the vehicle trajectory if necessary in an ocean envi-
ronment with several uncertainties and reduces the vehicle
energy consumption as the plan utilizes the vehicle’s drifting
and other actuation capabilities. First, we generated the water
ﬂow pattern from water current prediction data. Second, a
directed graph was created based on the water ﬂow pattern
and the vehicle kinematic model and we applied the shortest
path algorithm to ﬁnd paths from all initial locations to a
goal location. Finally, a feedback plan was computed that

−118.4

−118.2

−118

−117.8

−117.6

33.2

33.4

33.6

33.8

15
34

0

5

10

D

h
p
e

t

(

m

e

t

e

r

s

)

L o n g i

t u d e 

( d e g r e e s )

Latitude (degrees)

Fig. 6. A computed feedback plan showing the best actions with black arrows
from all locations of the environment while the vehicle is oriented eastward
at its initial deployment.

−118.4

−118.2

−118

−117.8

−117.6

33.2

33.4

33.6

33.8

15
34

0

5

10

D

p
e

t

h

(

m

e
e

t

r

s

)

L o n g i

t u d e 

( d e g r e e s )

Latitude (degrees)

Fig. 7. A calculated navigation trajectory delineated with the white line from
the red initial location to the green goal location applying the feedback plan.

drives the vehicle from any location to the goal location of
the environment using the best possible actions.
In the future, we can analyze the temporal variability of
our computed feedback plan. We plan to evaluate our method
with a quantitative study incorporating several uncertainties
and noises in executing a navigation trajectory in our simulated
environment.

ACKNOW L EDGMENT S

This work was supported by the National Science Founda-
tion via NSF MRI 1531322, the US Ofﬁce of Naval Research
Award N000141612634, and the Deanship of Scientiﬁc Re-
search at Umm Al-Qura University Award 3-2-0002-COM-15.
This work is also supported in part by the U.S. Department
of Homeland Security under Grant Award Number 2017-ST-
062000002.

 
 
 
 
[18] W. H. Al-Sabban, L. F. Gonzalez, and R. N. Smith, “Extending
persistent monitoring by combining ocean models and Markov decision
processes,” in Proceedings of the MTS/IEEE OCEANS, pp. 1–10, 2012.

[19] A. F. Shchepetkin and J. C. McWilliams, “The Regional Oceanic
Modeling System (ROMS): a split-explicit, free-surface, topography-
following-coordinate oceanic model,” Ocean Modelling, vol. 9, no. 4,
pp. 347–404, 2005.

RE F ERENCE S

[1]

[2]

J. C. Kinsey, D. R. Yoerger, M. V. Jakuba, R. Camilli, C. R. Fisher,
and C. R. German, “Assessing the deepwater horizon oil spill with the
sentry autonomous underwater vehicle,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
pp. 261–267, 2011.

J. Das, K. Rajany, S. Frolovy, F. Pyy, J. Ryany, D. A. Caronz, and
G. S. Sukhatme, “Towards marine bloom trajectory prediction for AUV
mission planning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4784–4790, 2010.

[3] A. Kalmbach, Y. Girdhar, H. M. Sosik, and G. Dudek, “Phytoplankton
hotspot prediction with an unsupervised spatial community model,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pp. 4906–4913, 2017.

[4] T. Manderson, J. Li, N. Dudek, D. Meger, and G. Dudek, “Robotic
coral reef health assessment using automated image analysis,” Journal
of Field Robotics, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 170–187, 2017.

[5] Autonomous
underwater
vehicles.
Available
at
https://www.mbari.org/at-sea/vehicles/autonomous-underwater-vehicles/ .

[6] Self-driving
robots
collect
water
samples
to
cre-
ate
snapshots
of
ocean
microbes.
Available
at
https://www.mbari.org/at-sea/vehicles/autonomous-underwater-vehicles/ .

[7] B. W. Hobson, J. G. Bellingham, B. Kieft, R. McEwen, M. Godin, and
Y. Zhang, “Tethys-class long range AUVs-extending the endurance of
propeller-driven cruising AUVs from days to weeks,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/OES Autonomous Underwater Vehicles Symposium, pp. 1–8,
2012.

[8] A. K. Sanyal and M. Chyba, “Robust feedback tracking of autonomous
underwater vehicles with disturbance rejection,” in Proceedings of the
American Control Conference, pp. 3585–3590, 2009.

[9] G. M. Reis, T. Alam, L. Bobadilla, and R. N. Smith, “Feedback-based
informative AUV planning from Kriging errors,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/OES Autonomous Underwater Vehicles, 2018.

[10] H. Xu and X. Feng, “An AUV fuzzy obstacle avoidance method under
event feedback supervision,” in Proceedings of the MTS/IEEE OCEANS,
pp. 1–6, 2009.

[11] M. Cashmore, M. Fox, T. Larkworthy, D. Long, and D. Magazzeni,
“AUV mission control via temporal planning,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pp. 6535–6541, 2014.

[12] C. V. Caldwell, D. D. Dunlap, and E. G. Collins, “Motion planning for
an autonomous underwater vehicle via sampling based model predictive
control,” in Proceedings of the MTS/IEEE OCEANS Seattle, pp. 1–6,
2010.

[13] R. N. Smith, Y. Chao, P. P. Li, D. A. Caron, B. H. Jones, and G. S.
Sukhatme, “Planning and implementing trajectories for autonomous un-
derwater vehicles to track evolving ocean processes based on predictions
from a regional ocean model,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 1475–1497, 2010.

[14] M. Chyba, T. Haberkorn, S. Singh, R. Smith, and S. Choi, “Increasing
underwater vehicle autonomy by reducing energy consumption,” Ocean
Engineering, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 62–73, 2009.

[15] T. Alam, G. M. Reis, L. Bobadilla, and R. N. Smith, “A data-driven
deployment approach for persistent monitoring in aquatic environ-
ments,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotic
Computing (IRC), pp. 147–154, 2018.

[16] T. Alam, G. M. Reis, L. Bobadilla, and R. N. Smith, “An underactuated
vehicle localization method in marine environments,” in Proceedings of
the MTS/IEEE OCEANS Charleston, pp. 1–8, 2018.

[17]

J. G. Bellingham, Y. Zhang, J. E. Kerwin, J. Erikson, B. Hobson,
B. Kieft, M. Godin, R. McEwen, T. Hoover, J. Paul, et al., “Efﬁcient
propulsion for the Tethys long-range autonomous underwater vehicle,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/OES Autonomous Underwater Vehicles,
pp. 1–7, 2010.

