xBD: A Dataset for Assessing Building Damage from Satellite Imagery

Ritwik Gupta1,2 Richard Hosfelt1,2 Sandra Sajeev1,2 Nirav Patel3,4 Bryce Goodman3,4
Jigar Doshi5 Eric Heim1,2 Howie Choset1 Matthew Gaston1,2
1Carnegie Mellon University 2Software Engineering Institute 3Defense Innovation Unit
4Department of Defense 5CrowdAI, Inc.

9
1
0
2

v
o

N

1
2

]

V

C

.

s

c

[

1
v
6
9
2
9
0

.

1
1
9
1

:

v

i

X

r

a

Abstract

We present xBD, a new, large-scale dataset for the ad-
vancement of change detection and building damage as-
sessment for humanitarian assistance and disaster recovery
research. Natural disaster response requires an accurate
understanding of damaged buildings in an affected region.
Current response strategies require in-person damage assess-
ments within 24-48 hours of a disaster. Massive potential
exists for using aerial imagery combined with computer vi-
sion algorithms to assess damage and reduce the potential
danger to human life. In collaboration with multiple disaster
response agencies, xBD provides pre- and post-event satel-
lite imagery across a variety of disaster events with building
polygons, ordinal labels of damage level, and correspond-
ing satellite metadata. Furthermore, the dataset contains
bounding boxes and labels for environmental factors such
as ﬁre, water, and smoke. xBD is the largest building dam-
age assessment dataset to date, containing 850,736 building
annotations across 45,362 km2 of imagery.

1. Introduction

Resource allocation, aid routing, rescue and recovery, and
many other tasks in the world of humanitarian assistance
and disaster response (HADR) can be made more efﬁcient
by using algorithms that adapt to dynamic environments.
To accomplish these tasks in the context of natural disaster
relief, it is necessary to understand the amount and extent of
damaged buildings in the area. Collecting this data is often
dangerous, as it requires people on the ground to directly as-
sess damage during or immediately after a disaster. With the
increased availability of satellite imagery, this task has the
potential to not only be done remotely, but also automatically
by applying powerful computer vision algorithms.
Currently, adequate satellite imagery that addresses build-
ing damage is not generally available. To model the complex
and dynamic nature of damage, imagery containing many
types of damage must be available in large quantities. To
this end, we introduce xBD: a large-scale dataset of satellite
imagery. xBD covers a diverse set of disasters and geo-

Figure 1: From top left (clockwise): Hurricane Harvey;
Palu Tsunami; Mexico City Earthquake; Santa Rosa Fire.
Imagery from DigitalGlobe.

graphical locations with over 800,000 building annotations
across over 45,000 km2 of imagery. To curate this dataset,
we worked with disaster response experts from around the
world who specialized in various disaster types to create
an annotation scale that accurately represented real-world
damage conditions. Furthermore, we created and executed a
rigorous, repeatable, and veriﬁable annotation process that
ensured high-quality annotations with supporting quality
control from experts.
The xBD dataset is used by the xView 2 prize challenge,
which aims to spur the creation of accurate and efﬁcient
machine learning models that assess building damage from
pre- and post-disaster satellite imagery.
In the rest of this paper, we go into details of the xBD
dataset. We begin by covering the requirements of the

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
dataset, the annotation scale, the collection process, dataset
statistics, the baseline model created for the xView 2 chal-
lenge, and potential use cases for the dataset beyond building
damage classiﬁcation. This work builds on top of [13] and
presents a ﬁnalized report on the entire xBD dataset.

2. Related Work

Many factors increase the complexity of damage assess-
ment from satellite imagery. The types and locations of
disasters have a signiﬁcant impact on the resulting damage.
Intuitively, damage after a ﬂood in the United States will
look substantially different from the aftermath of an earth-
quake in Nepal. In this section, we will explore the attributes
of existing satellite imagery datasets for damage assessment.

2.1. Existing Data Sources

Current satellite imagery datasets are often limited to
single disaster types and do not have common criteria for
assessing damage assessment
[9, 2, 20, 7]. As a result,
there is no meaningful way to compare damage assessments
between a tsunami in Japan [9] and a mudslide in Columbia
[20].
After many discussions with disaster response experts, it
was made clear that damage exists on a continuum. However,
because the personnel and time available for imagery analy-
sis are often limited, a damage scale that is more developed
than a simple binary “damaged”/“undamaged” option [9]
has not been explored.
An issue that many HADR imagery analysts face is the
presence of haze or mild occlusion in electro-optical (EO)
imagery. As a result, they sometimes must resort to lower
resolution synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imagery, which
may not always be available for the event under analysis.
Cloud occlusion in EO imagery is a well-known problem
that has been addressed via many traditional computer vision
and deep learning techniques [16, 1, 22].
Analysts regularly use contextual information in satel-
lite imagery to improve their damage assessments. These
contexts often include environmental factors such as the pres-
ence of water, ﬁre, smoke, and more. Relatively few datasets
[3, 11] provide information of this granularity.

2.2. Assessment Scales

Most HADR organizations need to assess many types of
building damage across different regions and disaster types.
A number of damage assessment scales are available in ex-
isting disaster response literature. However, these scales are
largely limited to a single disaster type or are speciﬁcally
focused on in-person assessment [14, 19, 17, 8]. [14] devel-
oped a damage scale for building damage assessment from
satellite imagery, but the scope was narrow and focused on
earthquakes. Having multiple, disjoint scales when respond-

ing to a disaster results in a large cognitive burden for HADR
organizations.
HAZUS from FEMA is a robust scale for multi-disaster
damage classiﬁcation, including earthquake, ﬂoods, and hur-
ricanes [6]. However, some of the criteria for assessment
require an analyst to be physically present at the disaster
site. For instance, the HAZUS Hurricane model considers
the roof, windows, and wall structure condition to determine
damage in a residential setting [6]. Some of these attributes,
like wall structure and windows, cannot easily be determined
from satellite imagery.
FEMA also created the FEMA Damage Assessment Oper-
ations Manual, which is speciﬁcally intended for qualitative
damage assessment [5]. However, like HAZUS, it is primar-
ily designed for in-person assessment.

3. Requirements for the xBD Dataset

xBD was created to fulﬁll a speciﬁc need in the world
of HADR. A set of requirements were created to guide the
collection, labeling, quality control, and dissemination of the
data. However, to make the dataset useful for a general set
of problems, certain requirements were tweaked or modiﬁed
to ﬁt the needs of the larger research community without
compromising the original dataset need.

3.1. Multiple Levels of Damage

After discussions with disaster response experts from
CAL FIRE and the California Air National Guard, it was
clear that agencies did not currently have the capacity to
classify multiple levels of damage. Many analysis centers
simply label buildings as “damaged” or “undamaged” to
reduce the amount of expert man-hours needed for assess-
ment, even though it was clear that damage is not a binary
status. Discerning between multiple levels of damage is a
critical mission need, therefore xBD needed to represent a
continuum of damage.

3.2. Image Resolution

Differences between levels of damage are often visually
minute. To facilitate the labeling of these types of damage,
supporting imagery must be of high ﬁdelity and have enough
discerning visual cues. We targeted satellite imagery to be
below a 0.8 meter ground sample distance (GSD) mark to
fulﬁll this requirement.

3.3. Diversity of Disasters

One goal of the xView 2 prize challenge is to output
models that are widely applicable across a large number
of disasters. This will enable multiple disaster response
agencies to potentially reduce their workload by using one
model with a known deployment cycle. xBD would need to
be representative of multiple disaster types and not simply

Figure 2: Pre-disaster imagery (top) and post-disaster imagery (bottom). From left to right: Hurricane Harvey; Joplin tornado;
Lower Puna volcanic eruption; Sunda Strait tsunami. Imagery from DigitalGlobe.

the ones for which a large amount of data was commonly
available.

3.4. Wide Diversity of Buildings

Building damage looks different based on the type of
building as well as the locale in which the building exists.
To properly represent this variance in building damage, xBD
sampled imagery from various regions of the world that
accounts for varying building sizes, densities, and more.

3.5. Negative imagery

Examples of imagery with no damage or no damaged
buildings are critical for learning the difference between dif-
ferent levels of disaster. Negative imagery therefore should
comprise a sizable percentage of the dataset.
In the subsequent sections, we highlight how xBD was
speciﬁcally designed to satisfy each of these requirements.

4. Joint Damage Scale

To assess damage from different types of disasters, dis-
aster response agencies currently have to use a variety of
different scales. This increases the cognitive burden on the
analysts and limits the transfer capability of labels across
datasets. We present the Joint Damage Scale (Table 4) for the
assessment of building damage from satellite imagery across
multiple disaster types. The Joint Damage Scale is created

with insight from NASA, CAL FIRE, FEMA, and the Cali-
fornia Air National Guard. Furthermore, the Joint Damage
Scale is grounded in existing literature, such as HAZUS [6],
FEMA’s Damage Assessment Operations Manual [5], the
Kelman scale [15], and the EMS-98 scale [12].

This scale is not meant as an authoritative damage as-
sessment rating. However, it does serve as a ﬁrst attempt
to create a uniﬁed assessment scale for building damage in
satellite imagery across multiple disaster types, structure
categories, and geographical locations.

The Joint Damage Scale ranges from no damage (0) to
destroyed (3). After multiple iterations with analysts, this
level of granularity was chosen as an ideal trade-off between
utility and ease of annotation. The descriptions of each
damage level have been generalized to handle the wide va-
riety of disasters present in xBD, which can result in some
amount of label noise. Although such nuance is not ideal
from an objective assessment standpoint, it allows analysts to
gracefully handle tough cases that fall between classiﬁcation
boundaries.

Due to the limitations presented by the modality of satel-
lite imagery, such as resolution, azimuth, and smear [21],
this scale presents a best-effort trade-off between operational
relevance and technical correctness. Thus, the Joint Damage
Scale cannot accommodate the degree of precision that a
scale meant for in-person, human assessment provides.

Figure 3: Disaster types and disasters represented in xBD around the world.

were not a part of the Open Data Program, which we dubbed
“Tier 3” events. We partnered with Maxar and the National
Geospatial-Intelligence Agency to activate speciﬁc areas of
interest (AOIs) from Tier 3 for inclusion in the Open Data
Program. A list of these events is provided in Table 1. All
imagery is available in three-band RGB formats.

5.2. Annotation Process

Annotation followed a multi-step process that created
polygons and damage classiﬁcations with a web-based anno-
tation tool that was developed in-house by CrowdAI.

5.2.1 Triage

Of the imagery provided by the Open Data Program, only
a small amount contained actual instances of damage. To
reduce the amount of wasted annotation time, we manu-
ally reviewed all available imagery to identify AOIs that
were usable for annotation. However, each AOI purpose-
fully included small amounts of buffer area (including the
surrounding regions) to ensure the availability of negative
imagery.

5.2.2

Imagery Matching and Polygon Annotation

Once AOIs containing damage are identiﬁed in the post-
disaster imagery (or post-imagery), the equivalent AOI must
be found and aligned in the pre-disaster imagery (or pre-
imagery). After all pairs of images were created, the pre-
imagery was sent to annotators to draw polygons around

Figure 4: Joint Damage Scale descriptions on a four-level
granularity scheme.

5. Dataset Collection

5.1. Imagery Source

Imagery
for
xBD was
sourced
from the
Maxar/DigitalGlobe Open Data Program1 , which re-
leases imagery for sudden onset major crisis events.
Speciﬁcally, the Open Data Program was chosen for its
availability of high-resolution imagery from many disparate
regions of the world. Of the multitude of open data events
that are currently available in the Open Data Program’s
catalog, we selected 11 disaster events from an initial list of
19. These 11 events are dubbed “Tier 1” events. In addition
to the Tier 1 events, we identiﬁed 8 additional events that

1 https://www.digitalglobe.com/ecosystem/open-data

Disaster Event Name

Guatemala Fuego Volcano Eruption
Hurricane Michael
Santa Rosa Wildﬁres
Hurricane Florence
Midwest US Floods
Indonesia Tsunami
Carr Wildﬁre
Hurricane Harvey
Mexico City Earthquake
Hurricane Matthew
Monsoon in Nepal, India, Bangladesh
Moore, OK Tornado
Tuscaloosa, AL Tornado
Sunda Strait Tsunami
Lower Puna Volcanic Eruption
Joplin, MO Tornado
Woolsey Fire
Pinery Fire
Portugal Wildﬁres

Event Dates

Jun 3, 2018
Oct 7-16, 2018
Oct 8-31, 2017
Sep 10-19, 2018
Jan 3 - May 31, 2019
Sep 18, 2018
Jul 23 - Aug 30, 2018
Aug 17 - Sep 2, 2017
Sep 19, 2017
Sep 28 - Oct 10, 2016
Jul - Sep, 2017
May 20, 2013
Apr 27, 2011
Dec 22, 2018
May 23 - Aug 14, 2018
May 22, 2011
Nov 9-28, 2018
Nov 25 - Dec 2, 2018
Jun 17-24, 2017

Table 1: Disasters selected for xBD.

Tier

Environmental Factors

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No

visible building footprints. An example of these pre-imagery
building footprints is shown in Figure 5

Figure 5: Building polygons (shown in green) on imagery
from Hurricane Michael (2018)

5.2.3 Post-Imagery Polygons Damage Classiﬁcation

The polygons that were extracted from the pre-imagery were
overlaid onto their matching post-imagery pair. This pro-
vided the “ideal” building footprint before any damage oc-
curs, since the footprint of a building may be dramatically
altered during a disaster. Each image was then sent to a group
of annotators where the buildings were classiﬁed based on

the Joint Damage Scale. The ﬁrst round consisted of multiple
instances of annotation. After the initial round of classiﬁca-
tion, each image went through a round of review to ensure
consistency in annotation. Finally, sets of annotations were
randomly sampled and reviewed by experts from the Cali-
fornia Air National Guard, NASA, and FEMA to validate
whether the damage classiﬁcations were accurate. These ex-
perts found that approximately 2-3% of the annotations had
been mislabeled. The mislabeled images were subsequently
corrected by the experts themselves.

5.2.4 Environmental Factors

In addition to annotating building damage, we provided
polygons that represent “environmental factors” visible in
any image included in the dataset. These environmental
factors include smoke, ﬁre, ﬂood water, pyroclastic ﬂow, and
lava. Flood water was interpreted as water visible in an area
where it is not normally expected to be present. This means
areas of “known water,” such as rivers, lakes, and ponds,
were excluded. Table 1 shows which disasters included
detectable environmental factors.

5.3. Design Trade-Offs

Due to various issues with edge cases in classifying dam-
age, re-projection, and imagery quality, many design trade-
offs were carefully constructed and followed throughout the
annotation process.

5.3.1 Image Shifting

6. Dataset Analysis

As part of the data ﬁnalization process for each disaster event,
we processed the post-disaster imagery to shift the image
pixels slightly. This was to account for re-projection issues
when overlaying the building polygons from the pre-imagery
onto the post-imagery. Since the paired images were taken at
different times (and sometimes with different sensors), small
changes in off-nadir angle, sun elevation angle, and other
considerations resulted in polygon drift, where the polygons
were consistently misaligned by a ﬁxed amount of pixels
across an entire image.
After damage classiﬁcation was complete, we sampled
many random image tiles from the post-disaster CatID and
calculated the average pixelwise shift by measuring the num-
ber of pixels between the edge of the polygon and the edge
of the corresponding building side. The number of pixels
was then used to compute the shift in meters based on the
ground sample distance of the image. The corresponding
UTM (Universal Transverse Mercator) shift was then ap-
plied to all post-disaster images within that disaster event
uniformly. Since this was a coordinate system-level transla-
tion, polygons were not shifted, nor was any change made
to the pre-disaster imagery.

5.3.2 Building Polygons Not Present in Post-Disaster
Imagery

In some cases, buildings that are visually present in the
post-disaster imagery do not have a corresponding polygon.
The most common causes of this discrepancy were 1) the
building did not exist in the pre-imagery (i.e., the building
was constructed after the disaster); 2) the building did not
meet the deﬁnition of a building in the pre-imagery (e.g.,
the building was still under construction); or 3) the building
was sufﬁciently occluded by clouds, haze, or vegetation
that an accurate polygon could not be drawn. Instances of
discrepancies 1) and 2) were negligible and occurred mainly
in datasets that spanned a large amount of time, such as the
US Midwest Floods dataset. In the annotation instructions
for post-imagery, annotators were told to ignore buildings in
the post-imagery that did not have polygons transferred over
from pre-imagery.

5.3.3 Ground Sample Distance (GSD) Differences

The GSD values associated with images of the same geo-
graphic region can vary due to a variety of factors. However,
these factors stem from the imagery itself, and not due to
the data annotation process. Furthermore, Maxar uses a pro-
prietary pansharpening algorithm whose resulting GSD is
not reported in the Open Data Program metadata. The ﬁnal
imagery GSD can be estimated using various methods in the
GDAL [10] toolkit.

The complete xBD dataset contains satellite images from
19 different natural disasters across 22,068 images and con-
tains 850,736 building polygons. The imagery covers a total
of 45,361.79 km2 .

6.1. Dataset Split

xBD is provided in train, test, and holdout splits in
a 80/10/10% split ratio, respectively. The speciﬁc split
counts are provided in Table 2. Compared to traditional
train/validation/test splits, this dataset splitting strategy is
meant to facilitate the xView 2 challenge. Participants can
split the provided training dataset into a validation set. The
test set is meant to be used as a ﬁxed evaluation set during
the open leaderboard phase of the challenge. The holdout
set is purposefully not released during the duration of the
challenge and is meant to be used as a private evaluation set
to counter any challenge-speciﬁc gaming. All dataset splits
will be made available at the end of the xView 2 challenge.

Split

Train
Test
Holdout

Images

18,336
1,866
1,866

Polygons

632,228
109,724
108,784

Table 2: xBD data splits and their respective annotation
counts.

6.2. Dataset Statistics

Disaster events are unevenly represented with regards to
their total imagery area in xBD. Figure 6 shows the distribu-
tion of areas covered from each disaster.

Figure 6: Area of imagery (in km2 ) per disaster event.

Interestingly, the amount of positive imagery that was
contributed to the dataset does not directly correlate with
the total area represented by each disaster. Figure 7 shows
the amount of positive and negative imagery in xBD as a
function of individual disaster events.

Certain disasters are much more polygon dense than oth-
ers. Of note, the Mexico City earthquake and the Palu
tsunami provide a large amount of polygons in compari-
son to their relatively low image areas. Figure 8 breaks this
down per disaster.
Finally, the distribution of damage classiﬁcations is highly
skewed towards “no damage,” which had more than eight
times the representation of the other classes. “No damage,”
“minor damage,” “major damage,” and “destroyed” are com-
posed of 313,033, 36,860, 29,904, and 31,560 polygons
respectively. There are an additional 14,011 polygons la-
beled as “unclassiﬁed.” Figure 9 breaks this difference down
visually.

Figure 7: Positive and negative imagery per disaster.

Figure 9: Distribution of damage class labels.

ferent types of disasters can also be a hurdle for localization
models.

7. Baseline Model

Baseline localization and classiﬁcation models were cre-
ated to assess the difﬁculty of the xBD dataset and to serve as
a starting point for the xView 2 challenge. All code is avail-
able at https://github.com/DIUx-xView/xview2-baseline/.

7.1. Localization

The localization model was based on a SpaceNet2 submis-
sion by Motoki Kimura3 , which featured an altered U-Net
architecture [18]. We lightly modiﬁed this model to ﬁt our
dataset. The model was trained on an eight GPU cluster for
seven days. The model achieved an IoU of 0.97 and 0.66 for
“background” and “building,” respectively.

7.2. Classiﬁcation

The classiﬁcation model is shown in Figure 10. The
ResNet50 is pre-trained on ImageNet [4] whereas the smaller
side network is initialized with random weights. All con-
volutional layers use a ReLU activation. The output is a
one-hot encoded vector where each element represents the
probability of an ordinal class.
The model uses an ordinal cross-entropy loss function.
Unlike traditional cross-entropy, ordinal cross-entropy pe-
nalizes relative to the distance between true and predicted
ordinal class. Since the difference between any two classes
is not interchangeable, this loss function allows the model to
better distinguish between the different levels of damage.

Figure 8: Polygons in xBD per disaster event.

7.3. Training

xBD presents an interesting challenge for the computer vi-
sion community because the distribution of labels and types
of disasters is highly unbalanced. Furthermore, the visual
cues that differentiate the different levels of damage can be
minute. The varying availability of negative imagery for dif-

The model was trained on 632,228 post-disaster image
polygons with a batch size of 64. The Adam optimizer with
a learning rate of 0.001, β1 of 0.9, and β2 of 0.999 was used

2 https://spacenetchallenge.github.io/
3 https://github.com/motokimura

Figure 10: Architecture of the baseline classiﬁcation model. The input is fed into a pre-trained ResNet 50 as well as a shallow
CNN. The outputs of each stream are concatenated and passed into dense layers for classiﬁcation.

for training. The network was trained for 100 epochs on 8
Nvidia GTX-1080 GPUs.

7.4. Evaluation

The weighted F1 score was the primary metric for evaluat-
ing the dataset. Weighted F1 balances precision and recall in
a harmonic mean and is well-suited for imbalanced datasets
such as xBD. Accuracy by itself is a ﬂawed metric, since a
classiﬁer that predicted “no damage” on all of the images
would retain 75% accuracy.
For the baseline model, we attained an overall weighted
F1 score of 0.2654. Table 3 breaks down F1 score on a
class-by-class basis. “Major damage” instances were often
classiﬁed as “minor damage,” resulting in a low recall. We
believe this result is due to a weak imbalanced training reg-
imen, as greater separation between these classes can be
made by a random classiﬁer. However, “minor” and “major”
damage classes also have minute visual differences, and we
expect most models to incur high confusion between these
two classes.

Damage Type
No Damage
Minor Damage
Major Damage
Destroyed

F1 Score
0.6631
0.1435
0.0094
0.4657

Precision
0.8770
0.1971
0.7259
0.5050

Recall
0.5330
0.1128
0.0047
0.4321

Table 3: Baseline F1 Scores

8. Conclusion

Natural disaster relief operations require accurate assess-
ments of building damage to effectively allocate aid, per-
sonnel, and resources. Currently, this is a dangerous and
time-consuming manual task that must be carried out by
human responders. By recognizing that there are distinct
visual patterns in damage that make this task automatable,

xBD provides a large corpus of imagery and annotated poly-
gons, along with an annotation scale. This will enable the
creation of vision models that can automate the assessment
of building damage and perform it remotely. xBD contains a
variety of disaster types across visually distinct regions of
the world. This satisﬁes many real-world requirements as
dictated by several disaster response agencies.

Acknowledgements: The authors would like to thank
Phillip SeLegue (California Department of Forestry and
Fire Protection), Major Megan Stromberg and Major
Michael Baird (California Air National Guard), Colonel
Christopher Dinote (Joint Artiﬁcial Intelligence Center),
and many others from the Indiana Air National Guard,
United States Geological Survey, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, Federal Emergency Management
Agency, and the city of Walnut Creek, CA, for their
subject matter expertise and assistance in creating xBD
and the xView 2.0 challenge. We acknowledge the
Maxar/DigitalGlobe Open Data program for the imagery
used in this dataset. Many thanks to Hollen Barmer, Nathan
VanHoudnos, Diane Hosfelt, Abirami Kurinchi-Vendhan,
and Courtney Rankin for reviewing this manuscript.

©2019 Carnegie Mellon University. This material is based
upon work funded and supported by the Department of De-
fense under Contract No. FA8702-15-D-0002 with Carnegie
Mellon University for the operation of the Software Engineer-
ing Institute, a federally funded research and development
center.

[DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A] This material has been
approved for public release and unlimited distribution.
Please see Copyright notice for non-US Government use
and distribution. DM19-1227

volutional neural networks: A case study of the 2010 haiti
earthquake. Remote Sensing, 10(11):1689, Nov. 2018. 2
[15] I. Kelman. Physical Flood Vulnerability of Residential Prop-
erties in Coastal, Eastern England. PhD thesis, University of
Cambridge, U.K., 2002. 4
[16] O. R. Mitchell, E. J. Delp, and P. L. Chen. Filtering to re-
move cloud cover in satellite imagery. IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience Electronics, 15(3):137–141, July 1977. 2
[17] S. Okada and N. Takai. Classiﬁcations of structural types
and damage patterns of buildings for earthquake ﬁeld investi-
gation. Journal of Structural and Construction Engineering
(Transactions of AIJ), 64(524):65–72, 1999. 2
[18] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox. U-Net: Con-
volutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation.
arXiv:1505.04597 [cs], May 2015. 7
[19] A. Thieken, V. Ackermann, F. Elmer, H. Kreibich,
B. Kuhlmann, U. Kunert, H. Maiwald, B. Merz, K. Piroth,
J. Schwarz, R. Schwarze, I. Seifert, J. Seifert, and L.-F.-U.
Innsbruck. Methods for the evaluation of direct and indirect
ﬂood losses. Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium
on Flood Defence, page 10, May 2008. 2
[20] United States Geological Survey. Building damage assess-
ment in the city of mocoa. United Nations Institute for Train-
ing and Research, Apr. 2017. 2
[21] W. A. Wahballah, T. M. Bazan, and M. Ibrahim. Smear effect
on high-resolution remote sensing satellite image quality. In
2018 IEEE Aerospace Conference, pages 1–14, Mar. 2018. 4
[22] X. Zhu, F. Wu, T. Wu, and C. Zhao. Remote sensing imag-
ing simulation and cloud removal. International Journal of
Modern Physics B, 31(16-19):1744079, May 2017. 2

References

[1] T. Bai, D. Li, K. Sun, Y. Chen, and W. Li. Cloud detection for
high-resolution satellite imagery using machine learning and
multi-feature fusion. Remote Sensing, 8(9):715, Sept. 2016. 2
[2] S. A. Chen, A. Escay, C. Haberland, T. Schneider, V. Staneva,
and Y. Choe. Benchmark dataset for automatic damaged build-
ing detection from post-hurricane remotely sensed imagery.
arXiv:1812.05581 [cs], Dec. 2018. 2
[3] I. Demir, K. Koperski, D. Lindenbaum, G. Pang, J. Huang,
S. Basu, F. Hughes, D. Tuia, and R. Raska. DeepGlobe 2018:
A challenge to parse the earth through satellite images. In
2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), pages 172–17209, Salt
Lake City, UT, USA, June 2018. IEEE. 2
[4] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-
Fei. ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database.
page 8. 7
[5] Federal Emergency Management Agency. Damage assess-
ment operations manual: A guide to assessing damage and
impact. Technical report, Federal Emergency Management
Agency, Apr. 2016. 2, 4
[6] Federal Emergency Management Agency. Hazus hurricane
model user guidance. Technical report, Federal Emergency
Management Agency, Apr. 2018. 2, 4
[7] R. Foulser-Piggott, R. Spence, K. Saito, D. M. Brown, and
R. Eguchi. The use of remote sensing for post-earthquake
damage assessment: Lessons from recent events, and future
prospects. Proceedings of the Fifthteenth World Conference
on Earthquake Engineering, page 10, 2012. 2
[8] C. J. Friedland. Residential Building Damage from Hurricane
Storm Surge: Proposed Methodologies to Describe, Assess
and Model Building Damage. PhD thesis, Louisiana State
University, 2009. 2
[9] A. Fujita, K. Sakurada, T. Imaizumi, R. Ito, S. Hikosaka,
and R. Nakamura. Damage detection from aerial images
via convolutional neural networks. In 2017 Fifteenth IAPR
International Conference on Machine Vision Applications
(MVA), pages 5–8, Nagoya, Japan, May 2017. IEEE. 2
[10] GDAL/OGR contributors. GDAL/OGR Geospatial Data Ab-
straction Software Library. 2019. 6
[11] L. Giglio, J. T. Randerson, and G. R. van der Werf. Analysis
of daily, monthly, and annual burned area using the fourth-
generation global ﬁre emissions database (GFED4). Journal
of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences, 118(1):317–328,
2013. 2
[12] G. Gr ¨unthal, R. Musson, J. Schwarz, and M. Stucchi. EMS-98
(european macroseismic scale). Technical report, European
Seismological Commision, 1998. 4
[13] R. Gupta, B. Goodman, N. Patel, R. Hosfelt, S. Sajeev,
E. Heim, J. Doshi, K. Lucas, H. Choset, and M. Gaston.
Creating xBD: A dataset for assessing building damage from
satellite imagery. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pages
10–17, 2019. 2
[14] M. Ji, L. Liu, and M. Buchroithner. Identifying collapsed
buildings using post-earthquake satellite imagery and con-

