Persistent Homology as Stopping-Criterion
for Natural Neighbor Interpolation

Luciano Melodia, Richard Lenz

Abstract—In this study the method of natural neighbours is
used to interpolate data that has been drawn from a topological
space with higher homology groups on its ﬁltration. A particular
difﬁculty with this algorithm are the boundary points. Its core
is based on the Voronoi diagram, which induces a natural dual
map to the Delaunay triangulation. Advantage is taken from this
fact and the persistent homology is therefore calculated after
each iteration to capture the changing topology of the data. The
Bottleneck and Wasserstein distance serve as a measure of quality
between the original data and the interpolation. If the norm of
two distances exceeds a heuristically determined threshold, the
algorithm terminates. The theoretical basis for this procedure is
given and the validity of this approach is justiﬁed with numerical
experiments.
Index Terms—Interpolation, Natural Neighbors, Persistent
Homology, Machine Learning.

I . IN TRODUC T ION

M OST interpolation techniques ignore global properties
of the underlying topological space where data has
been drawn from. The topology of an augmented point set
depends entirely on the choice of the interpoland. However, it
does not depend on the topological structure of the data set or
its sub-level sets.
The method of natural neighbors is an interpolation tech-
nique considering these issues. Using Delaunay triangulation
or the Voronoi tesselation to determine the position of a new
data point respects the topology in terms of simple-homotopy
equivalence [1]. The Delaunay triangulation and the Voronoi
tesselation behave dual.
For the Voronoi
tessellation an implicit restriction to a
closed subset of the imbedded space is used, see Fig. 2. The
closure of this subset depends on the metric, in Euclidean
space it is ﬂat. This restriction, also called clipping, leads to
different weightings for the interpolation varying according
to the particular choice of clip. The clip does not represent
the intrinsic geometry of the data, but that of the surrounding
space. This can lead to an undesired topology during inter-
polation, since the target space that is interpolated does not
reﬂect the topology nor the geometry of the data. This paper
does not deal with the correct selection of the clip, but with
the detection of topological changes during interpolation.

Chair of Computer Science 6, Friedrich-Alexander University, Erlangen-
N ¨urnberg, 91058 Deutschland. E-Mail: {name.surname@fau.de}.
Luciano Melodia is responsible for the experimental implementation, the
elaboration of the theoretical background and the written form.
Richard Lenz mentored, supervised and guided the development of the
proposed methods and the research.
It is hereby conﬁrmed that there is no conﬂict of interest with third parties.
It is conﬁrmed that this work is not funded by any other charity.
Manuscript received November 20, 2019; revised December 18, 2019.

Up to this point it is an open problem to detect these errors
and to terminate the algorithm in time. Our contribution to
solve this problem is divided into three parts:
1) We introduce persistent homology as a stopping-
criterion for interpolation methods. The distance be-
tween two persistence diagrams is an indicator of
changes within the topology of certain sub-level sets of
a point set during augmentation. It can be used to vary
geometric precision.
2) We cover the theoretical connection of the Voronoi
tesselation via duality to the Delaunay triangulation. It
is shown that the Delaunay complex is simple-homotopy
equivalent to the ˇCech complex by the Theorem of Sim-
plicial Collapse. The connection is extended to homo-
logy groups to prove that the Delaunay triangulation
from the natural neighbors method is already sufﬁcient
to calculate a suitable persistence diagram, under the
restrictions for Hurewicz isomorphism.
3) We investigate the method on a handwritten signature
data set. It provides interesting and visually interpretable
topological features due to the topography of the letters.
Higher homology groups such as H1 and H2 may appear
on the ﬁltration of a signature. This often represents an
insurmountable hurdle for other interpolation methods.
The paper is structured as follows: Related work on the
development of interpolation using natural neighbours is pre-
sented in Sect. II, as well as on persistent homology. The
theory of simplicial complexes and ﬁltrations is discussed in
Sect. III. Sect. IV is an outline of the theory of simplicial
homology. In Sect. V the Bottleneck and Wasserstein distance
and their stability properties are discussed followed by the
algorithm of natural neighbors in Sect. VI. The paper closes
with numerical experiments Sect. VII and a bottom line on
the ﬁndings presented in Sect. VIII.

I I . R ELAT ED WORK

The algorithm of natural neighbors has been invented in its
vanilla form by Sibson [1]. In the early development of the
method only C 1 interpolands were known for the coordinate
representation of multidimensional data using this algorithm.
It became generalized in 2004 to C k interpolands for a
representation of k-times differentiable coordinate systems [2].
Using efﬁcient algorithms and exploiting the duality of
Delaunay triangulations and Voronoi diagrams, it was possible
to make the natural neighbors method available for real-
time applications [3]. Thus the method was made scalable
and implemented so efﬁciently that it found application to
superresolution in the ﬁeld of image reconstruction [4].

Deﬁnition 3.2 (Simplicial Complex): A ﬁnite simplicial
complex denoted by K and imbedded into Euclidean space
is a ﬁnite set of simplices with the following properties [12]:
1) Each face of a simplex of K is again a simplex of K.
2) The intersection of two simplices is either empty or a
common face of both.
Deﬁnition 3.3 (Filtration): A ﬁltration is a decomposition
of a ﬁnite simplicial complex K into a nested sequence of
sub-complexes, starting with the empty set.

∅ = K0 ⊂ K1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Kn = K,
for t ∈ {0, . . . , n − 1}.

Kt+1 = Kt ∪ σt+1 ,

(2)
(3)

It is convention to mention the empty set as it is part of
every set [13]. Considering the topological properties of each
sub-level set of a tame function (Def. 5.4), it is possible to
reconstruct this function up to isomorphism. Therefore a step
size for the parameterization of a ﬁltration is determined, i.e.
the radius r of a closed Ball for the ˇCech complex (Def.
3.4), to approximate all sub-level sets as good as possible.
This can be thought as a lens which indicates the granularity
of the ﬁltration and on which basis the homology classes
are calculated. In the following, variants of the simplicial
complexes and their connection to each other are presented,
which are decisive for our method.
Deﬁnition 3.4 ( ˇCech Complex [14]): Let r ≥ 0 be a real
number and Br (x) = {y ∈ Rd | ||x − y|| ≤ r} the closed ball
with radius r centered around the point x ∈ X ⊆ Rd . The
ˇCech complex for a ﬁnite set of points X is deﬁned by
ˇCechr (X) = (cid:14)U ⊆ X

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

The Delaunay triangulation is used to take into account the
topology of the data. Up to this point, however, there are still
problems as degenerated points occur after frequent use of
the algorithm. In order to measure topological changes, ﬁrst
developments were made to calculate the homology groups
of ﬁltrations over the data set. Speaking about homology,
we refer to simplicial homology. The consideration of the
topology of a ﬁltration representing the topology of different
sub-level sets leads to the concept of persistence [5]. It is called
persistent homology, because it measures which homology
classes arise on the ﬁltration of the data set during a particular
parametrization and at which point they disappear.
Persistent homology encodes the topological properties of
a sub-level set of a function in arbitrary granularity and
can be calculated in high dimensions [6]–[8]. In particular,
this measurement of topological properties behaves Hausdorff
stable, i.e. small changes in the function value also cause small
changes in the persistent homology [9]. Efﬁcient data struc-
tures and algorithms have been designed for the construction
of topologically accurate complexes [10] and scalable ways
to compare persistence diagrams using a Wasserstein distance
have been developed [11].

I I I . S IM P L IC IA L COM P LEX E S AND F I LTRAT ION S

To interpolate data with higher homology groups, infor-
mally a point cloud which forms evidend loops in different
dimensions within its structure, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a suitable
interpoland. A parametric polynomial
interpolation is not
always feasible due to the necessity of representing a more
complex topological structure.
Simplicial complexes are therefore introduced to obtain an
object encoding the topology of the data. By implication, a
meaning is assigned to the distribution of the points in space.
The mutual arrangement of the points forms a shape. From
this basic assumption it is concluded that if the data changes
its shape through a transformation, it is no longer identiﬁable
as the original data set, see Sect. IV for a precise deﬁnition
in terms of homology groups.
Imbedded simplicial complexes are suitable data structures
to detect the change of shape, by computing their homology
classes. Primer to the introduction of the concept of simplicial
complexes,
the elements of which they are composed are
considered.
Deﬁnition 3.1 (Simplex): Simplices, denoted by σ, are the
set of permuted span of X = {x0 , x1 , . . . , xk } ⊂ Rd with
k + 1 points, which are not contained in any afﬁne subspace
of dimension smaller than k [12]. A simplex forms the convex
hull

σ := (cid:14)x ∈ X

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) k(cid:88)i=0

λixi with

λi = 1 and λi ≥ 0(cid:15) .

(1)

k(cid:88)i=0

Simplices are well-deﬁned imbeddings of polyhedra. It is
possible to construct complex objects out of them, which are
composed of simple components, glueing simplices together
at their edges. Edges are meant to be h-dimensional simplices
or h-simplices. Informally, the glueing results in a simplicial
complex consisting of a series of k-simplices, which are
connected by h-simplices, satisfying h < k.

distance measures to be obtained. The Vietoris-Rips complex
spans the same 1-skeleton as the ˇCech complex [16].
Lemma 3.5.1: For the imbedding of the Vietoris-Rips and
the ˇCech complex into any metric space, the following rela-
tionship holds [16]:
Ripsr (X) ⊆ ˇCechr (X) ⊆ Rips2r (X).
(6)
Proof: Choose a simplex σ = {x0 , x1 , . . . , xk } ∈
Ripsr (X). The norm of the selected distance parameter is less
or equal to the radius of a closed ball around x0 . Therefore

k

x0 ∈

(a) ˇCechr (X).

(b) ˇCechDelr (X).

(c) Delr (X).

(d) Wit(L, W )

(e) Wrapr (X).

Fig. 1: Four of ﬁve geometric complexes appearing in the collapsing sequence of the ˇCech-Delaunay Collapsing Theorem 34
from (a)-(c) and (e), according to [17]. (a) A high dimensional ˇCech complex projected onto the plane. (b) The ˇCech-Delaunay
complex, (c) the Delaunay complex, (d) the witness complex, which is an outlier in the row due to the changing shape by
different witness sets (white bullets) and (e) the wrap complex.

uniformly distributed in its convex hull or initialized com-
pletely outside the data set. In addition to equally distributed
initialization, strategies such as sequential MaxMin can lead
to a more accurate estimate of homology groups [18].
The time bound for the construction of a witness complex is
O (|W |log|W | + k|W |) [16], which makes it suitable for high
dimensional data.

IV. S IM P L IC IA L HOMO LOGY TH EORY

Our perspective on data is based on a hypothesis known
as manifold assumption [19]. It is supposed that the data is
drawn from a topological manifold.
A manifold describes the space from which points are
drawn. Drawing enough equally distributed points from it one
can obtain its shape by triangulation.
Computationally feasible invariants of topological spaces in
terms of its connected components and holes shall be consid-
ered. In topology one is particularly interested in whether a
space can be transformed into another by stretching, twisting
or tearing. Remember that a circle cannot be continuously
transformed into a straight line without cutting it up. For
this purpose k-dimensional holes play a central role. They
characterize a topological space decisively.
Deﬁnition 4.1 (Homotopy Equivalence): Let M and N be
two topological spaces. If there exists a continuous map h :
M × I → N, which deforms M over time I into N, they are
said to be homotopy equivalent or having the same homotopy
type.
Homotopy classes and groups are topological
invariants
(preserved under bijective transformations) and describe a
topological space. But it is notoriously difﬁcult to obtain a
homotopy.
Considering the holes within a simplicial complex for
changing r, a good estimate of the homotopy groups can be
obtained. An algebraic way to compute something strongly re-
lated, which counts these holes is homology. The connection is
established by the Hurewicz Theorem 4.1. For an introduction
to homotopy theory it is referred to [20]–[22].

Theorem 4.1 (Hurewicz Homomorphism [23]): Let πk (x, X)
be the kth homotopy group of a topological space X in x ∈
X. There exists a homomorphism h : πk (x, X) → Hk (x, X)
into the kth homology group at x. The homomorphism is an
isomorphism if X is (n− 1)-connected and k ≤ n when n ≥ 2
with abelianization for n = 1.
Homology groups are not only a topological invariant, they
are also isomorphic under the conditions of Theo. 4.1 to the
equal dimensional homotopy groups. In this particular case
one is able to use an easier to calculate invariant to describe
the feature space up to homotopy. The Betti numbers are such
an invariant deﬁned by the rank of the k-th homology group.
The k-th homology group is a vector space whose rank gives
the number of k-dimensional holes of a topological space X.
The invariants of simplicial complexes spanned over a point
set are calculated. To compute the rank of the kth homology
group the chain groups are introduced.
Deﬁnition 4.2 (Chain Group): Let σk be a k-simplex of
K := K(X) over a set of points X. Further let k ∈ N. The
linear combinations of k-simplices span a vector space

Ck := Ck (K) = span (cid:0)σk
1 , . . . , σk

(cid:1) .

n

k(cid:88)i=0

(k − 1)th .

(9)
This vector space is called kth chain group of K and contains
all linear combinations of k-simplices.
The coefﬁcients of the group lie in Z2 and the group
structure is established by (Ck , +), with eCk = 0 being the
neutral element and addition as group operation. A linear map
∂ : Ck → Ck−1 is induced from the kth chain group into the
Using such an algebraic structures yields unsatisfactory
geometrical intuitions, but on the other hand an efﬁcient way
to express the concept of a boundary.
Deﬁnition 4.3: The boundary operator ∂k (σk ) : Ck →
Ck−1 is deﬁned by
(10)

(−1)i (v0 , . . . , (cid:98)vi , . . . , vk ) .

∂k (σk ) =

The vertex set of the k-simplex is named v0 , . . . , vk . The
boundary of a line segment should be described by its two end-

points, the boundary of a triangle, or 2-simplex by the union
of the edges and the boundary of a tetrahedron, or 3-simplex
by the union of the triangular faces. Furthermore, a boundary
itself shall not have a boundary of its own. This implies, that
the property to be boundaryless is equivalent to the concept
of a loop, i.e. the possibility to return from a starting point to
the same point via the k-simplices, by not entering a simplex
twice and by not leaving a simplex unentered. This group
oriented k-simplex (v0 , . . . , vk ) one element (cid:98)vi is omitted.
homomorphism contains the alternating sum, thus for each
The boundary operators can be composed ∂2 := ∂ ◦ ∂ and
one observes that every chain, which is a boundary of higher-
dimensional chains, is boundariless, which means in return that
an even composition of boundary maps is zero, i.e. ∂2Z
For a proof it is referred to [23].
Deﬁnition 4.4 (Kernel of a Chain Group): The kernel of a
chain group (Ck , +) with neutral element eCk = 0 is given
by

= 0.

k (eCk−1 ) =

ker ∂k = ∂−1
= (cid:12)σk ∈ Ck

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ∂k (σk ) = eCk−1 (cid:13) .

(11)

(12)

All elements of the chain group are mapped in this way by the
boundary operator to the neutral element of the lower chain
group.
Deﬁnition 4.5 (Group of Cycles): A group of k-cycles Zk
is deﬁned as

Zk := ker ∂k ⊆ Ck .

(13)

Every k-simplex mapped to zero by the boundary operator
is considered to be a loop and the collection of loops is the
group of k-cycles Zk . The k-boundaries are therefore Bk =

Im ∂k+1 ⊂ Zk .

Deﬁnition 4.6 (Homology Group): The kth homology group
Hk is the quotient group of Zk and the group of k-boundaries:

Hk := Zk/Bk = ker ∂k/ Im ∂k+1 .

(14)

Taking the rank of the homology group one gets its Betti
number. In a certain sense the Betti numbers count
the
amount of holes in a topological space, i.e. β0 the connected
components, β1 tunnels, β2 voids and so forth.
Deﬁnition 4.7 (Betti Numbers): The kth Betti number is
deﬁned as

βk = rank Hk .

(15)

Using Betti numbers, the persistence diagrams are deﬁned,
representing the birth and death of homology classes from the
respective kth homology group within a ﬁltration.
The ﬁltration of a simplicial complex deﬁnes a sequence
of homology groups connected by homomorphisms for each
dimension. For the following maps the notation is slightly
addapted to guarantee readability.
Lemma 4.7.1: The kth homology group over a simplicial
complex Kr with parameter r is denoted by Hr
The following sequence results from the group homomorphism
[24]:

k = Hk (Kr ).

: Hr

gr,r+1
k

0 = H0

k

g0,1

k → Hr+1
k
k

k−−−→ H1

g1,2

k−−−→ · · ·

gn,r

k

k−−−→ Hr

k = 0

gr,r+1

k−−−−→ Hr+1

k

The image Im gr,r+1
consists of all k-dimensional homo-
logy classes which are born in the Kr -complex or appear
before and die after Kr+1 .
Deﬁnition 4.8 (kth Persistent Homology Group): The di-
mension k persistent homology group is the image of the
homomorphisms induced by inclusion

Hn,r

k = Im fn,r
k ,

for 0 ≤ n ≤ r ≤ r + 1 [24].
For each dimension k there is an index pair n ≤ r. The
following multiplicity (see Def. 5.6) is calculated from this,
since elements of one and the same homology group can occur
several times at the same time of birth or death and form
therefore a multiset [24]:

)

(cid:125)

µn,r
k = (βn,r−1
k

− βn,r

k )

− (βn−1,r−1
k

− βn−1,r
k

(16)

Birth in Kr−1 , death at Kr .

Birth before Kr , death at Kr .

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

According to Edelsbrunner et al.,
this equation is to be
interpreted as follows [24]: The ﬁrst difference counts the
homology classes born in Kr−1 and dying when Kr is entered.
The second difference counts the homology classes born
before Kr−1 and dying by entering Kr . It follows that µn,r
counts the k-dimensional homology classes born in Kn and
dying in Kr .
Deﬁnition 4.9 (kth Persistence Diagram): The persistence
diagram for the kth dimension of a ﬁltration, denoted as
, is the set of points (n, r) ∈ R2 with µn,r
Deﬁnition 4.10 (Persistence Diagram): We deﬁne the per-
sistent diagram as the disjoint union of all k-dimensional
persistence diagrams

P (dimk)

k = 1.

K

k

(cid:71)

PK =

k∈Z P (dimk)

K

.

(17)

In this work k ∈ {0, 1, 2} is chosen, up to the second
homology group. The next section introduces distances for
comparison of two persistence diagrams. In particular, it is
important to resolve the multiplicity in a meaningful way. Note
that the multiplicities are only deﬁned for n < r and that no
values are below the diagonal. This is to be interpreted such
as a homology class can’t disappear before it arises.

V. M EA SUR E S O F D I STANC E

In order to use persistence diagrams as a stopping-criterion,
the change in persistent homology must be measurable in
each iteration step of the interpolation. From this measurement
it must also be possible to deduce when a sufﬁciently high
change occurs to terminate the algorithm.
These changes can generally be measured by a distance in
a metric space. In this section two distances for persistence
diagrams are presented:
1) The Bottleneck distance, which is the coarser of both,
but ultimately leads to more stable results.
2) The Wasserstein distance, which is more sensitive to
outliers and therefore requires additional conditions to
be stable.
The Wasserstein and Bottleneck distance have been choosen
for this method due to their stability properties.

can be mapped to the nearest point in another. The proof of
Cohen-Steiner et al. is structured as follows [25]:
1) Proof of Hausdorff stability:

dH (Pf , Pg ) ≤ ||f − g||∞ .
dB (Pf , Pg ) ≤ ||f − g||∞ .

2) Strenghten Hausdorff stability to proof:

The proof is recaptured in terms of a tame 1-dimensional
function to provide better intuitions. Note that the theorem has
not been proven yet to the best of our knowledge for more
general functions than tame functions. Therefore our analysis
is also restricted to point sets drawn from manifolds with tame
functions as coordinate representation.
a) Preliminary Deﬁnitions:
Deﬁnition 5.5 (Hausdorff distance): The Hausdorff distance
between two multisets X and Y is deﬁned by

dH (X, Y ) = max (cid:14) sup

x∈X

inf

y∈Y

||x − y||∞ , sup

inf

x∈X

y∈Y

||y − x||∞(cid:15) .

Deﬁnition 5.6 (Multiplicity): A multiplicity is deﬁned as
the number of values occurring in a multiset and is denoted
as #(X). The multiplicity of a persistence diagram without its
diagonal ∆ is given by

(21)

µr
n .

#(Pf − ∆) = (cid:88)n<r
dH (Pf , Pg ) ≤ ||f − g||∞ = α

b) Main Theorem: From the results of Cerri and Landi
[9] it is known that the Hausdorff inequality

(22)
holds and that there must exist a point (x1 , x2 ) ∈ Pf which
has a maximum distance α to a second point (y1 , y2 ) ∈ Pg .
In particular, (y1 , y2 ) must be within the square

[x1 − α, x1 + α] × [x2 − α, x2 + α].

(23)

From the Hausdorff stability more general inequalities are
derived, considering the inﬁnity norm.
Lemma 5.6.1 (Box-Lemma): Let x1 ≤ x2 ≤ x3 ≤ x4 be
points in the extended plane ¯R2 . Further let R = [x1 , x2 ] ×
α] another shrinked square by some parameter α. Then the
following inequality holds:
# (Pf

[y1 , y2 ] be a square and Rα = [x1 + α, x2 − α] × [y1 + α, y2 −

K1
r , K2

A. Bottleneck Distance
Let X be a set of points imbedded in Euclidean space and
r two simplicial complexes forming a ﬁltration over the
points. Both simplicial complexes are ﬁnite and have in all
their sub-level sets homology groups of ﬁnite rank. Note that
values. Furthermore, the L∞ -norm between two points x =
these groups change due to a ﬁnite set of homology-critical
deﬁned by

(x1 , x2 ) and y = (y1 , y2 ) for x ∈ PK1 and y ∈ PK2 is
||x − y||∞ = max {|x1 − y1 |, |x2 − y2 |} .
||x − y||∞ = |x1 − y1 |.

(18)
By convention it is assumed that if x2 = y2 = +∞, then
Deﬁnition 5.1 (Bottleneck Distance): If PK1 and PK2 are
such two persistence diagrams and x := (x1 , x2 ) ∈ PK1 and
y := (y1 , y2 ) ∈ PK2 , respectively, their Bottleneck distance
is deﬁned as

||x − ϕ(x)||∞ ,

(19)

dB (PK1 , PK2 ) = inf

ϕ

sup

x∈PK1

where ϕ is the set of all bijections from the multiset PK1 to
PK2 [16], [24].

B. Bottleneck Stability
The Bottleneck stability has been derived, proven and
discussed by Cohen-Steiner et al. [25]. We explain it and
recapture the basic properties of Hausdorff stability. To do
so, a smooth function f : R → R is considered as an example.
Deﬁnition 5.2 (Critical Values): A point x ∈ R of the
smooth function f is called critical and f(x) is called critical
value of f if f (cid:48) (x) = 0. The critical point
is also not
degenerated if f (cid:48)(cid:48) (x) (cid:54)= 0.
The terms f (cid:48) (x) and f (cid:48)(cid:48) (x) refer to the total ﬁrst and second
derivatives, respectively. The term shall further be specialized
to homology critical value of a smooth function f.
Deﬁnition 5.3 (Homology Critical Values): Im f(x) is a
homology critical value, if there is a real number y for which
an integer k exists, such that for a sufﬁciently small α > 0
the following map is not an isomorphism:
Deﬁnition 5.4 (Tame Functions): Consider a smooth func-
(cid:0)f−1 ((−∞, y])(cid:1) is ﬁnite-dimensional for all k ∈ Z and
tion f as in Def. 5.3. Then f is called tame if it has a ﬁnite
number of homology critical values and the homology group
Considering tame functions, it is also well known that a
persistence diagram can be generated by pairing their critical
values with each other and transferring corresponding points
(depending on the functions value) to the persistence diagram.
Note that this is an example of the dependence of persistent
homology on the given metric or afﬁne connection of the
imbedding space.
The Bottleneck distance of the persistence diagram of two
tame functions f, g is restricted to a norm between a point and
its bijective projection. Therefore not all points of a multiset

(cid:0)f−1 ((−∞, y + α])(cid:1) (20)

(cid:0)f−1 ((−∞, y − α])(cid:1)

→ Hk

y ∈ R.

Hk

Hk

of f outside the diagonal ∆ or the distance between a point
outside the diagonal and the diagonal itself:

δf = min (cid:12)||x − y||∞ (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) Pf − ∆ (cid:51) x (cid:54)= y ∈ Pf(cid:13) .
||f − g||∞ ≤
δf
2
.

(26)
Choose a second tame function g : X → R, which satisﬁes
Like in the deﬁnition of persistence diagrams (see Def. 4.9),
the multiplicity of the point x ∈ Pf − ∆ is denoted by µ.
The box Rα (x) is centered at x and has radius α = ||f −
g||∞ . Applying the Box-Lemma 5.6.1 the following inequality
results:

µ ≤ #(Pg

The natural neighbor algorithm preserves local topological
properties, which solve these kind of problems [30]. It has
a direct connection to the Voronoi
tesselation leading to
an almost
topology preserving representation [1]. Almost,
because before this paper there was no stopping condition
deﬁned giving satisfactory topological results.
The idea of the algorithm is to re-weight the coordinates
of the data for each point by using the change in volume of
Voronoi regions with an added point relative to the volume of
the Voronoi regions without the additional point. The Voronoi
diagram (see Def. 6.1) is based on the Delaunay triangulation,
which is in return dual to the Voronoi tesselation. Hence it is
not needed to construct the Voronoi diagram explicitly, since
all operations can take place on the Delaunay triangulation.
The letter is well understood and supported by various efﬁcient
data structures [31]. This interpolation method generalizes by
its deﬁnition to arbitrary dimensions.

A. The Voronoi Tesselation

Boissonnat and Cazals have shown that for a set of points
X ⊂ Rd distributed over an imbedded manifold M the natural
neighboring points behave like a local coordinate system for
M by increasing their density [32]. This local coordinate
system represents the manifold from which the collected data
is sampled. The investigation of invariants of a coordinate
representation of such a manifold should provide information
about its structure. For this purpose the Voronoi diagram is
deﬁned, cf. Sect. III.
Deﬁnition 6.1 (Voronoi Diagram): A Voronoi diagram
dgmVor over a set of points X is deﬁned by the union of the
Voronoi regions and assigns a polyhedron to each point, see
Fig. 2:

(cid:91)

x∈X

dgmVor (X) :=

Vor(x),

for all x ∈ X.

(30)

The Voronoi diagram builds a convex union of polyhedra.
The Voronoi cells have no common interior and intersect
at their boundaries. Because every point in Euclidean space
belongs to a Voronoi region, the Voronoi diagram covers the
entire Rd . All points of the surrounding space in which the
data set is imbedded and which are closest to the respective
data point from X are assigned to its Voronoi region. This is
also called Voronoi tesselation. The combinatorial complexity
of the Voronoi diagram of n points of Rd is at most the
combinatorial complexity of a polyhedron deﬁned as the inter-
section of n half-spaces of Rd+1 [33]. Considering the duality,
one can deduced that the overall time for the construction of
2 ) ) [33].
The resulting polygons can then be divided into Voronoi
edges and vertices. Using Sibson’s terminology [1], the natural
neighbors of a point are deﬁned by the points of the neighbor-
ing Voronoi polygons. It can be stated that the natural neighbor
is the closest point x to two other points y and z within a
collection of points X being the signature.

dgmVor (X) takes O(n log n + n( d

(a) dgmVor (X).

(b) Inserting a point.

(c) Cells Vor(xi ).

(d) dgmVor (X ∪ x• ).

Fig. 2: (a) Clipped version of the Voronoi tesselation. For
arbitrary manifolds the curvature must be considered for
a correct clip. (b) Tesselation with an added point, which
creates a new Voronoi region, stealing parts of the neigh-
boring regions x1 , . . . , x5 ∈ Rd . (c) The determined weights
w1 , . . . , w5 ∈ R+ by the fractional amount of occupied
volume. (d) Tesselation with an added point.

To yield the position of the new point one has to calculate
the Voronoi diagram of the original signature dgmVor (X) and
the one with an added point
dgm•

(cid:91)

Vor(x).

(31)

Vor (X ∪ x• ) :=

x∈X∪x•

The Voronoi diagram dgm•
Vor (X ∪ x• ) consists of one
Voronoi region more than dgmVor (X), see Fig. 2 (a) and (d).
This polygon being part of dgm•
Vor (X ∪ x• ) contains a cor-
responding portion of its area. The weights of the coordinate
representation of the new point can be determined by the ratio
of the volume stolen from its Voronoi regions [34]:

^x• =

λlx•l ,

(32)

L(cid:88)l=1

λl = (cid:14) vol(Vor(xl )

B. The Duality of Delaunay Complex and Voronoi Diagram
The result that the Delaunay triangulation Del(X) and the
Voronoi diagram dgmVor (X) behave dual is used, formulated
by Chazal et al. [33], Chap. 4. This duality gives a bijective
correspondence between the faces of one complex and the
faces of the other one, including incidence and reversibility
of operations. Due to duality, both complexes have the same
homotopy type.
Theorem 6.1 (Duality of Del(X) and dgmVor (X)): The
Delaunay triangulation Del(X) of a point set X ⊂ Rd , which
is one extremal of the Delaunay complex, behaves dual to the
Voronoi diagram dgmVor (X) of this point set.
Thus the Delaunay complex is particularly suitable to be
used for persistent homology, because of its lower calculation
effort in comparison to the Voronoi tesselation or the ˇCech
complex.
It remains to be investigated to what extent suitable char-
acteristics in the form of homology groups are preserved
when persistent homology is calculated on the Delaunay
triangulation.

C. The Simplicial Collapse
The Delaunay triangulation of the data set is calculated
during Voronoi interpolation. This complex could be suitable
to calculate persistent homology on it. It would avoid the
burden of computing an additional simplicial structure. To
achieve this, the Theorem of the Simplicial Collapse is used,
established by Bauer and Edelsbrunner [14]. The argument is
structured as follows:
1) The simplicial collapse shows the simple-homotopy
equivalence of the ˇCech complex, the Delaunay- ˇCech
complex, the Delaunay complex and the Wrap complex.
2) Simple-homotopy equivalence is a stronger condition
than homotopy equivalence. An elementary simplicial
collapse determines a strong deformation retraction up to
homotopy. Hence, simple-homotopy equivalence implies
homotopy equivalence.
3) Under the conditions of the Hurewicz Theorem there is
an isomorphism between homotopy groups and homo-
logy groups, thus also a correspondence of structures.
The complete proof of the simplicial collapse is not pre-
sented, therefore we refer to the work of Bauer and Edels-
brunner [14].
The ˇCech complex is related to the Delaunay complex by
the simplicial collapse. In a combinatorial sense this property
can be given by looking at an abstract simplicial complex ˜K.
Deﬁnition 6.2 (Abstract Simplicial Complex): A family of
simplices σ of a non-empty ﬁnite subset of a set
˜K is an
abstract simplicial complex if, for every set σ (cid:48) in σ and every
non-empty subset σ (cid:48)(cid:48)
⊂ σ (cid:48) the set σ (cid:48)(cid:48) also belongs to σ.
Assuming σ and σ (cid:48) are two simplices of ˜K so σ ⊂ σ (cid:48) and
dim σ < dim σ (cid:48) . Furthermore, if σ (cid:48) is a maximal face of ˜K
and no other maximal face of ˜K contains σ, then σ (cid:48) is called
free face.
Deﬁnition 6.3 (Simplicial Collapse): A simplicial collapse
(cid:38) of ˜K is the removal of all σ (cid:48)(cid:48) simplices, where σ ⊆ σ (cid:48)(cid:48)
σ (cid:48) , σ being a free face.

⊆

(cid:1)
(cid:1)

(cid:8)τk+1 > σ : f(τ) ≤ f(σ)(cid:9)
(cid:8)νk−1 < σ : f(ν) ≥ f(σ)(cid:9)

Now it is possible to deﬁne the simple-homotopy type based
on the concept of simplicial collapse.
Deﬁnition 6.4 (Simple-Homotopy Equivalence): Two ab-
stract simplicial complexes ˜K and ˜G are said to have the same
simple-homotopy type, if there exists a ﬁnite sequence
˜K = ˜K0 (cid:38) ˜K1 (cid:38) · · · (cid:38) ˜Kn = ˜G,
with each arrow representing a simplicial collapse or expan-
sion, the latter being the inverse to the former.
Intuitively
speaking,
two
simplicial
complexes
are
combinatorial-equivalent,
if it
is possible to deform one
complex into the other with a ﬁnite number of moves.
Following the proof of Bauer and Edelsbrunner discrete
Morse functions and critical simplices shall be deﬁned at this
point.
Deﬁnition 6.5 (Discrete Morse Function): Let K be a
Morse function f : K → R is a function that has the following
simplicial complex and σ, τ, ν ∈ K simplices, then a discrete
1) # (cid:0)
properties for each k-simplex σ:
2) # (cid:0)
≤ 1,
≤ 1.
The Morse functions help to understand the topology of
the underlying space, as the sub-level set of the function only
changes when it passes a critical value. Informally, it can be
said that a discrete Morse function is a weakly increasing
function and whenever f(σ) = f(τ) one of the simplices is
a maximum coface of the other [35].
1) # (cid:0)
Deﬁnition 6.6 (Critical Simplices [35]): A critical simplex
(cid:1) = 0,
2) # (cid:0)
(cid:1) = 0.
of f is a simplex σ satisfying the following conditions:
If σ is a critical simplex the number f(σ) ∈ R is a critical
value.
The critical simplices establish the relation to the critical
values, which can trigger a topological change in a collapse.
For the main theorem it is important to show that these critical
simplices are also contained in the lower simplicial complexes
to which the ˇCech complex is supposed to collapse.
Theorem 6.2 ( ˇCech-Delaunay Collapse [17].): Let X be a
ﬁnite set of points in general position in Rd . Then
ˇCechr (X) (cid:38) Del ˇCechr (X) (cid:38) Delr (X) (cid:38) Wrapr (X)
(34)
for all r ∈ R. This establishes the simple-homotopy equiva-
lence of the ˇCech- and Delaunay complex.
Proof: Let be E = ∅ and F = X, then the ﬁrst two relations
are obtained with the Selective Delaunay Collapse, see [14]
Delr (X) for every r ∈ R. Be VX the gradient of the Delaunay
Theo. 5.9. To get the third, use the fact that Wrapr (X) ⊆
radius function sX : Del(X) → R, cf. Vertex Gradient Lemma
5.1 [14]. Each interval in VX is either disjoint from Delr (X)
or a subset of Delr (X), similar is true for Wrapr (X). All
critical simplices of Delr (X) are also contained in Wrapr (X).
It follows that Delr (X) \ Wrapr (X) is the disjoint union of
non-singular intervals of VX and according to the Generalized
Gradient Collapsing Theorem, cf. [14] Theo. 2.2, this implies
Delr (X) (cid:38) Wrapr (X).

(cid:8)τk+1 > σ : f(τ) ≤ f(σ)(cid:9)
(cid:8)νk−1 < σ : f(ν) ≥ f(σ)(cid:9)

The simple-homotopy equivalence of the four different
complexes is established, a particular type of homotopy equiv-
alence that admits a purely combinatorial description in terms
of elementary collapses and expansions [14], [36].
We are only interested in whether simple-homotopy equiv-
alence implies homotopy equivalence. Since elementary sim-
plicial collapses form a strong deformation retraction that is
unique up to homotopy, see [36] §2, it can be concluded that
they preserve the homotopy type.
This shows that all four complexes are suitable for calculat-
ing persistent homology as a result of the simplicial collapse
up to homotopy equivalence. Is the underlying space (n − 1)-
connected, i.e. if it is not empty and path-connected and the nth
homotopy groups vanish identically, then for the kth homotopy
group for a k ≤ n and n ≥ 2 with abelianization for n = 1,
according to the Hurewicz Theorem 4.1, the homomorphism
into the kth homology group is an isomorphism. This isomor-
phism allows to determine an estimate of the homotopy groups
from the persistence diagram.

V I I . NUM ER ICA L EX PER IM EN T S

The experiments were conducted on a NVIDIA Quadro
RTX 4000. All source code is written in Python 3.7. The
library Geometry Understanding in Higher Dimensions is
used for the calculation of the simplicial complexes, ﬁl-
trations and persistent homology [38]. All experiments in
the context of this paper are published on GitHub under
https://karhunenloeve.github.io within the ∂SIML project.

A. Parametrization
1) The Natural Neighbor Method: In all experiments as
many new points are added as are already in the respective
example of a signature for each interpolation step. This means
that the number of data points is doubled per iteration. The
points are inserted uniformly into a clipped region, see Fig. 2.
Then it is proceeded as described in Sect. VI.
2)
ˇCech and Vietoris-Rips Complex: The Vietoris-Rips
complex is expanded up to the third dimension. This creates
edges, triangles and tetrahedra as faces.
Another parameter speciﬁed as maximum edge length is set
to the average edge length between two points within the data
set to obtain a more sparse representation of the simplicial
complex. Although the Vietoris-Rips complex has the same
1-skeleton as the ˇCech complex, the 1-skeleton is restricted
in these experiments to one of its subsets. Since it is our
intention to test the performance of parametrization that are
as adequate as really necessary, the same r is used for the
ˇCech and the Vietoris-Rips complex, so that the Vietoris-Rips
complex is topologically farther away from the union of closed
balls around each data point, but faster to compute.
To the best of our knowledge the problem of ﬁnding an
optimal radius or distance threshold for these complexes is
considered open [39], [40]. Thus empirical heuristics are used:

r = max

x,y∈X

||x − y||.

(35)

Fig. 3: Bottleneck and ﬁrst Wasserstein distances between the
persistence diagrams of the ﬁltration in iteration t and t + 1.
The persistent homology has been computed on the ˇCech
complex, Vietoris-Rips complex and the witness complex, re-
spectively. A total of 250 examples from a signature collection
are represented [37]. Each line corresponds to a single sample
and the lines are colored corresponding to one of six selected
users in • gray, • black, • blue, • yellow, • orange and • red.

3) Witness Complex: The strong witness complex, imbed-
ded into Rd , is recalculated for each sample at each interpola-
tion step. A uniformly distributed selection of 5% of the data
points of each example determines the landmarks to use.
The low amount of landmarks allows real-time calculation
even after the ﬁfth interpolation step, for which the number of
data points exceeds 10.000 · 2 per signature.
4) Heuristic for α: A free parameter α quantiﬁes a tol-
erance to topological change, measured by Wasserstein or
Bottleneck distance. Quantifying what means a signiﬁcant
topological change is not trivial and requires further inves-
tigation beyond the scope of this paper. A decision must be
made on the following hypotheses:
• H0 : The P t
K and P t+1
persistence diagrams have differ-
ent underlying distributions.
• H1 : The P t
K and P t+1
persistence diagrams have the
same underlying distribution.
Czado and Munk have proposed an asymptotic solution for

K

K

t0t1t2t3t4t5(a)dB,Delaunay.dB(PtDel,Pt+1Del)t0t1t2t3t4t5(b)dW1,Delaunay.dW1(PtDel,Pt+1Del)t0t1t2t3t4t5(c)dB,Vietoris-Rips.dB(PtRips,Pt+1Rips)t0t1t2t3t4t5(d)dW1,Vietoris-Rips.dW1(PtRips,Pt+1Rips)t0t1t2t3t4t5∞(e)dB,witness.dB(PtWit,Pt+1Wit)t0t1t2t3t4t5(f)dW1,witness.dW1(PtWit,Pt+1Wit)Fig. 4: Gray • signatures are valid. Yellow • signatures are critical and stop interpolation. Red • signatures are invalid.
Persistence diagrams are calculated on the Delaunay complex. In the ﬁrst letter of (0) the natural neighbor is more often the
point to the right of the writing than the viewer’s line of thought, implying an N. The interpolation stops when the topology
of these points creates new connected components, see top row (2). In the last part of the writing is an element of H1 which
disappears. It is noticeable that many holes are preserved, but the density of the points is changed and certain holes are shifted,
like the distance of a V -forming letter pair. This shift creates differences in the persistence diagrams and also leads to the stop.

testing by trimmed Wasserstein distance of two distributions,
which is adapted here [41]. Our solution is not exact, it follows
the expected value of the persistence diagrams. It is, however,
exact in the limit:

(cid:90) 1−γ
γ

∆γ→0 (cid:88)x∈X

f(x)dx = lim

f(x)∆γ.

(36)

We slightly change the trimmed Wasserstein distance to an
empirical estimate and use this estimate for our experiments.
We accept a small error generated by the use of empirical
measurements for our analysis.
Deﬁnition 7.1 (Empirical Trimmed Wasserstein Distance):
The empirically trimmed Wasserstein distance of two persis-
tence diagrams is

^Γ p
γ (P t

K , P t+1

K ) =

1
(1 − 2γ)

K )j ||p∞∆γ

||(P t

K )j − P t+1

 1

p

,

 m(cid:88)j=1

where α ∈ [0, 1/2) denotes a trimming bound resulting from
the integral for the continuous case and is adapted as a
difference in a ﬁnite weighted sum.
The critical region of the equivalence test for our hypothesis
is expressed as (cid:18) nm
H0 against H1 follows the analysis by Czado and Munk and
where zγ denotes the γ-quantile of the standard normal
distribution and n = m, with n being the number of samples.

p ^Γ p
γ − αp
^σγ

(cid:19) 1

≤ zγ ,

n + m

(37)

γ (P t
γ (P t

K , P t+1
K , P t+1

K ) > α.
K ) ≤ α.

The initial problem can be rephrased in terms of the deﬁned
distance:
• H0 : Γ p
• H1 : Γ p
5) Data: For this experiment 45 signatures per user are
considered. The signatures show the same writing, but are
different and independent samples. In total we investigate 83
users, i.e. just as many different writings. We assume that the
persistence diagrams are statistically independent. For each
user we have a set of 45 persistence diagrams and a set of 45
corresponding handwritings.

µX

B. Evaluation
The parameters for our experiment are stated in Alg. 1.
In Fig. 5 basic statistics are computed for the entire data set
such as mean µX , standard deviation σX , variation σX
and the
Wasserstein distance dW1 = dW1 (Xorg , Xt ). The statistics are
also computed for the interpolated data with topological stop,
respectively, marked with ∼. Note that for each signature it is
decided separately up to which interpolation step the algorithm
is executed.
An improvement for each measured statistic at each iteration
step by using the topological stop is achieved. In Fig. 3 the
topological similarity between the individual users is made
visual. It is conﬁrmed that both the Vietoris-Rips and the
Delaunay complex are suitable to estimate the topological
characteristics. The calculations using the witness complex
produced far less stable results. This is due to the small
selection of landmarks of only 5%. Further experiments show

(0)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(0)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(0)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)Del ← PDel ; ^Γ p

(cid:48)

Algorithm 1 Voronoi interpolation or natural neighbor inter-
polation with heuristic topological stopping-criterion.

5: for P (cid:48)
for all x• ∈ X• do

Require: A point set X = {x1 , . . . , xk } being the signature.
(cid:48) ← X
(cid:46) Initialize λs and persistence diagram.
(cid:46) Set constant parameters.
X• ← U (conv X

1: λ, P ← ∅, ∅
2: α, γ, p ← 0.01, 0.1, 1
4: PDel ← PH.Del(X)
3: X
Del ← PH.Del(X
γ (PDel , P (cid:48)
Del ) ≤ α; P (cid:48)
6:
Del ← Triang.Del(X)
)
7:
Del• ← Triang.Del(X ∪ x• )
← resort(Del)
8:
← resort(Del• )
9:
λ ← diff(dgmVor , dgm•
10:
x• ← reweight(x• , λ)
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:

(cid:46) Persistent homology on Delaunay.
(cid:48)
(cid:46) Uniform points in convex hull.

) do

(cid:46) Determine weights.
(cid:46) Reweight added point.
(cid:46) Update X
(cid:48) .

(cid:46) Delaunay triangulation.
(cid:46) Voronoi diagram.

Vor

dgmVor
dgm•
(cid:48) ← X
(cid:48)

X

(cid:48) ∪ x•

end for
16: end for
17: return X

Vor )

µX

Fig. 5: Mean µ, standard deviation σ, variation σX
and
ﬁrst Wasserstein distance of all data sets of the respective
interpolation step t0 , . . . , t1 are calculated. The Wasserstein
distance is computed with respect to the original data. ˜σ is
the variance of all samples interpolated with topological stop.
Analogous to this also all other statistics. Note that for the
statistics marked with ∼ the total number of data points is
lower, because in some examples the interpolation is stopped.
The statistics are scaled to ensure best possible readability.

that the differences in the iteration steps for witness complexes
with more landmarks increasingly follow the diagrams Fig. 3
(c) and (d), but do not scale well.

C. Limitation
The additional points are initialized in the convex hull of
the Delaunay complex. Therefore only a very small deviation
from its topological properties is possible, see Fig. 4. It must
be judged whether this is a desired effect. For this experiment,
the implicit topology of the handwriting, when following the
typography of the letters, was not interpolated. Often other
pairs were chosen, cf. Fig. 4. A possible solution for this is to

establish similar methods with other complexes and different
parametrization, thereby the geometrical precision could be
adapted.

V I I I . CONCLU S ION S & FU TUR E WORK

In this threatise the theoretical background of interpolation
by means of natural neighbours was elaborated. The result
is a stopping-criterion with a hypothesis test to determine
whether an interpolated signature still originates from the same
distribution as the source.
We have worked out the theoretical backgrounds of Bot-
tleneck and Wasserstein distance to measure differences in
persistent homology and could visualize the changing topology
of each group of signatures, see Fig. 3.
Our measurement results show an improvement of basic
statistics compared to the vanilla natural neighbor interpola-
tion. We have shown the theoretical connection of Voronoi
diagrams to the Delaunay complex and its connection to
other complexes, which should serve as a basis to explore
related algorithms. We have discussed, that up to homotopy
equivalence – due to certain conditions homology equivalence
– the Delaunay complex, ˇCech Delaunay complex and wrap
complex can also be used for ﬁltration.
During our investigations we were restricted in some as-
pects, see Sect. VII-C, out of which the following open
research questions arose:
• To compute the Voronoi tesselation, Rd must be restricted
to a closed neighborhood. The intrinsic geometry of the
data points is often not the Euclidean one. On the other
handside the frequently used imbedding of the Voronoi
tesselation is. This causes unwanted artifacts. Future
work could derive a suitable geometrically motivated
clipping of the boundaries (or imbedding of the Delaunay
triangulation).
• To our knowledge there is no evidence known that
the Voronoi
tesselation obtains the homology groups.
According to [42], the Voronoi tessellation is stable, in
the sense that small perturbations on the points lead
to equally small amounts of changes of the Voronoi
cells. However, the experiments show that for increasing
iterations additional homology groups appear. Is it correct
(for general metric spaces) that the Voronoi tesselation
without restriction to a certain region preserves the homo-
logy groups or homotopy groups?
• Is there a geometrically meaningful clipping for general
metric spaces, for example using geodesics in a smooth
manifold setting?
Future work shall extend the topological stopping-criterion
for other interpolation methods. Further, a non-parametric T-
test with simulated p values shall be applied cf. [43], [44].

ACKNOW L EDG EM EN T

The authors would like to thank David Haller, Lekshmi B.G.
and Melanie Sigl for their corrections and suggestions which
have contributed to the uniformity of this paper. Furthermore
they thank Bastian Rieck, Anton Rechenauer and Jan Frahm

t0t1t2t3t4t50.40.60.81Scaledstatistics.µX˜µXσX˜σXσXµX˜σX˜µXw1˜w1who motivated and contributed signiﬁcantly to the develop-
ment of ideas through professional discussions and always had
time for feedback.

R E FERENC E S

[1] R. Sibson, “A brief description of natural neighbor interpolation,”
Interpreting Multivariate Data, pp. 21–36, 1981.
[2] H. Hiyoshi and K. Sugihara, “Improving the global continuity of
the natural neighbor interpolation,” in Computational Science and Its
Applications, 2004, pp. 71–80.
[3] Y. Li, W. Chen, and D. Lu, “The application of natural neighbor
interpolation in real-time environments,” in International Conference on
Cyberworlds 2008, 2008, pp. 306–313.
[4] R. M. Rodr´ıguez-Dagnino, “A super-resolution image reconstruction
using natural neighbor interpolation,” Computaci ´on y Sistemas, vol. 19,
no. 2, 2015.
[5] H. Edelsbrunner, D. Letscher, and A. Zomorodian, “Topological per-
sistence and simpliﬁcation,” Discrete and Computational Geometry,
vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 511–533, 2002.
[6] A. Zomorodian and G. E. Carlsson, “Computing persistent homology,”
Discrete & Computational Geometry, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 249–274, 2005.
[7] G. E. Carlsson and A. Zomorodian, “The theory of multidimensional
persistence,” Discrete and Computational Geometry, vol. 42, no. 1, pp.
71–93, 2009.
[8] G. E. Carlsson, G. Singh, and A. Zomorodian, “Computing multidimen-
sional persistence,” Journal of Computational Geometry, vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 72–100, 2010.
[9] A. Cerri and C. Landi, “Hausdorff stability of persistence spaces,”
Foundations of Computational Mathematics, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 343–
367, 2016.
[10] A. Zomorodian, “Fast construction of the vietoris-rips complex,” Com-
puters and Graphics, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 263–271, 2010.
[11] M. Carri `ere, M. Cuturi, and S. Oudot, “Sliced wasserstein kernel
for persistence diagrams,” in Proceedings of
the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2017, pp. 664–673.
[12] O. Parzanchevski and R. Rosenthal, “Simplicial complexes: Spectrum,
homology and random walks,” Random Structure Algorithms, vol. 50,
no. 2, pp. 225–261, 2017.
[13] F. Chazal, M. Glisse, C. Labru `ere, and B. Michel, “Convergence rates
for persistence diagram estimation in topological data analysis,” Journal
of Machine Learning Research, vol. 16, pp. 3603–3635, 2015.
[14] U. Bauer and H. Edelsbrunner, “The morse theory of ˇCech and delaunay
ﬁltrations,” in 30th Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry,
2014, p. 484.
[15] K. Borsuk, “On the imbedding of systems of compacta in simplicial
complexes,” Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 35, pp. 217–234, 1948.
[16] J.-D. Boissonnat, F. Chazal, and M. Yvinec, Geometric and Topological
Inference. Cambridge University Press, 2018, vol. 57.
[17] U. Bauer and H. Edelsbrunner, “The morse theory of ˇcech and delaunay
complexes,” Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, vol.
369, no. 5, pp. 3741–3762, 2017.
[18] V. D. Silva and G. Carlsson, “Topological estimation using witness
complexes.” SPBG: Symposium on Point-Based Graphics, vol. 4, pp.
157–166, 2004.
[19] T. Lin and H. Zha, “Riemannian manifold learning,” IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 796–
809, 2008.
[20] P. G. Goerss and J. F. Jardine, Simplicial Homotopy Theory. Springer
Science and Business Media, 2009.
[21] G. W. Whitehead, Elements of Homotopy Theory.
and Business Media, 2012, vol. 61.
[22] B. Gray, Homotopy Theory: An Introduction to Algebraic Topology.
Academic Press, 1975, vol. 64.
[23] A. Hatcher, Algebraic Topology. Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[24] H. Edelsbrunner and J. Harer, “Persistent homology – a survey,” Con-
temporary mathematics, vol. 453, pp. 257–282, 2008.
[25] D. Cohen-Steiner, H. Edelsbrunner, and J. Harer, “Stability of persis-
tence diagrams,” Discrete and Computational Geometry, vol. 37, no. 1,
pp. 103–120, 2007.
[26] C. Villani, Optimal Transport: Old and New.
Business Media, 2008, vol. 338.
[27] M. Togninalli, E. Ghisu, F. Llinares-L ´opez, B. Rieck, and K. Borgwardt,
“Wasserstein weisfeiler-lehman graph kernels,” Accepted as Conference
Paper for Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.

Springer Science and

Springer Science

[28] D. Cohen-Steiner, H. Edelsbrunner, J. Harer, and Y. Mileyko, “Lipschitz
functions have l p-stable persistence,” Foundations of computational
mathematics, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 127–139, 2010.
[29] J.-D. Boissonnat and F. Cazals, “Smooth surface reconstruction via
natural neighbour interpolation of distance functions,” in Proceedings
of the 16th Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry, 2000, pp.
223–232.
[30] T. A. Bobach, “Natural neighbor interpolation - critical assessment
and new contributions,” Doctoral Thesis, Technische Universit ¨at Kaiser-
slautern, 2009.
[31] O. Devillers, S. Meiser, and M. Teillaud, “Fully dynamic delauney
triangulation in logarithmic expected time per operation,” in Proceedings
of the 2nd Workshop on Algorithms and Data Structures, 1991, pp. 42–
53.
[32] J. Boissonnat and F. Cazals, “Natural neighbor coordinates of points
on a surface,” Computational Geometry, vol. 19, no. 2-3, pp. 155–173,
2001.
[33] J.-D. Boissonnat, R. Dyer, and A. Ghosh, “Delaunay triangulation of
manifolds,” Foundations of Computational Mathematics, vol. 18, no. 2,
pp. 399–431, 2018.
[34] F. Anton, D. Mioc, and A. Fournier, “Reconstructing 2d images with
natural neighbour interpolation,” The Visual Computer, vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 134–146, 2001.
[35] D. Fern ´andez-Ternero, E. Mac ´aas-Virg ´os, N. A. Scoville, and J. A.
Vilches, “Strong discrete morse theory and simplicial ls category: A
discrete version of the lusternik-schnirelmann theorem,” Discrete and
Computational Geometry, 2019.
[36] M. Cohen, A Course in Simple-Homotopy Theory.
and Business Media, 2012, vol. 10.
[37] S. H. U. of Transylvania, “The mobisig online signature database,”
https://ms.sapientia.ro/ manyi/mobisig.html, accessed: 2019-04-01.
[38] GUDHI User and Reference Manual. GUDHI Editorial Board, 2015.
[Online]. Available: http://gudhi.gforge.inria.fr/doc/latest/
[39] L. Wasserman, “Topological data analysis,” Annual Review of Statistics
and Its Application, vol. 5, pp. 501–532, 2018.
[40] A. Zomorodian, “Topological data analysis,” Advances in Applied and
Computational Topology, vol. 70, pp. 1–39, 2012.
[41] C. Czado and A. Munk, “Assessing the similarity of distributions-ﬁnite
sample performance of the empirical mallows distance,” Journal of
Statistical Computation and Simulation, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 319–346,
1998.
[42] D. Reem, “The geometric stability of voronoi diagrams with respect
to small changes of the sites,” in Proceedings of
the 27th Annual
Symposium on Computational Geometry, 2011, pp. 254–263.
[43] A. Robinson and K. Turner, “Hypothesis testing for topological data
analysis,” Journal of Applied and Computational Topology, vol. 1, no. 2,
pp. 241–261, 2017.
[44] P. Bubenik, “Statistical topological data analysis using persistence land-
scapes,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 16, no. 1, pp.
77–102, 2015.

Springer Science

Luciano Melodia, M.A. studied German and Italian
Philology as well as Information Science and Media
Informatics at the University of Regensburg, and
received his Bachelor of Arts in German Philology in
2015. He completed his studies with a Master of Arts
in Information Science in 2018 at the Computational
Intelligence and Machine Learning Lab (CIML)
and is currently a Ph.D. student at the Friedrich-
Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg in Com-
puter Science. He is a member of the German
Informatics Society (GI).

Prof. Dr.-Ing. Richard Lenz is Professor for Evo-

lutionary Data Management at
the University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg. He studied computer science
at
the University of Kaiserslautern. In 1997 he
received a Ph.D. from the University of Erlangen
and in 2005 a habilitation degree from the University
of Marburg. His research focuses on Information
Systems in Healthcare, Data Quality and Data In-
tegration. He is speaker of the special interest group
Informatics in Life Sciences of the German Infor-
matics Society (GI).

