JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. 8, MMM AAA

1

On the separation of shape and temporal patterns in
time series
-Application to signature authentication-

Pierre-François Marteau,

9
1
0
2

v
o

N

1
2

]

M

D

.

s

c

[

1
v
0
6
3
9
0

.

1
1
9
1

:

v

i

X

r

a

Abstract—In this article we address the problem of separation
of shape and time components in time series. The concept of
shape that we tackle is termed temporally neutral to consider that
it may possibly exist outside of any temporal speciﬁcation, as it is
the case for a geometric form. We propose to exploit and adapt a
probabilistic temporal alignment algorithm, initially designed to
estimate the centroid of a set of time series, to build some heuristic
elements of solution to this separation problem. We show on some
controlled synthetic data that this algorithm meets empirically
our initial objectives. We ﬁnally evaluate it on real data,
in
the context of some on-line handwritten signature authentication
benchmarks. On the three evaluated tasks, our approach based
on the separation of signature shape and associated temporal
patterns is positioned slightly above the current state of the art
demonstrating the applicative beneﬁt of this separating problem.

Index Terms—Time series averaging, Shape and Time Separa-
tion, Time Elatic Kernels, Handwritten Signature Authentication.

I . IN TRODUC T ION

S OME time series are quite speciﬁc in a way that they
describe shapes. This is the case, for instance, for a
dynamical system reaching a limit cycle in its observable
state space. The concept of shape could have, however several
meanings, and consequently a shape can be characterized
through different perspectives. With a mathematical point of
view, geometrical shapes can be deﬁned as the solution set
of an ensemble of equations. Simple shapes such as ellipses
or complex structure such as strange attractors or fractal sets
are fully entering into this kind of conceptual deﬁnition for a
shape. In such view, if the equations deﬁning the shape are
time independent, the shape is fully deﬁned as a geometric
object that exist outside any temporal speciﬁcation. Shapes,
in another hand, can also be described indirectly through
parametric equations that provide multivariate time series
somehow forming the contour of a shape. The parameter
entering into such equations is generally, by convention,
referred to as the time variable. Apart from such purely
mathematical formalizations, shapes have been also early
associated to visual patterns. This association has motivated
considerable research work in machine vision to identify or
recognize shape-object [1], from their contour, texture, colors,
etc. Progressively, from this somehow restricted view that

M. Marteau was with the Institut de Recherche en Informatique et Systèmes
AlÃl’atoires (IRISA), Université Bretagne Sud, Vannes, France.
E-mail: see http://people.irisa.fr/Pierre-Francois.Marteau/

assimilates a shape to an identiﬁable visual stimuli, a wider
range of shape characterization associated to other perceptual
stimuli has emerged. The acoustic channel has thereby led to
the deﬁnition of acoustic patterns, i.e. phonemes, characteristic
noises, musical forms, etc., that share a lot of similarity with
the visual shapes, at least in their deﬁnitions. Thereby, major
works have been done, in particular in the speech recognition
area, to model and identify shapes "encoded" in acoustic time
series. Beyond the acoustic channel modelization, time series
analysis has allows for the characterization of very general
"temporal" shapes [2], just as images or videos processing
has allowed for visual-shapes. Today,
temporal, visual or
visuo-temporal shape analysis ﬁnd applications in any area
of our digitized world.

We adopt in this article a more restrictive deﬁnition for
shape, somehow closer to a geometrical or mathematical char-
acterization, according to which a form can exist outside any
temporal consideration. Let us consider formally the ellipse
example that is completely deﬁned by the following equation
1.

x2
a2 +

y2
b2 = 1

(1)

(2)

The set of solutions in this equation completely and atempo-
raly deﬁnes an ellipse. However, as stated above, this shape
can also be deﬁned through a set of parametric equations (Eq.
2) that reintroduce a parameter, t, which we call the temporal
variable.

(cid:26) xt = a.cos(ωt)
yt = b.sin(ωt)

In this second formulation, the time series x(t) and y(t)
also completely deﬁne the ellipse shape. These function of t
can be understood as access functions to the elements of the
set of solutions.
When this parameter t is sampled, it can indeed be consid-
ered as an index allowing to enumerate the pairs (xtn , ytn )
that are solutions of the preceding equations and regrouped
this time in a multiset E = {(xtn , ytn )}n=0,1, cdots , with
tn = n/fe and fe the sampling frequency. We can then
assimilate the shape associated with the ellipse to the multiset

E .

Shapes that can be characterized in this way are relatively
diverse and potentially complex. They emerge in particular in
the asymptotic behaviors of some nonlinear dynamic systems,
stationary or not, described by differential or difference
equations, in the form of limit cycles or strange attractors like

 
 
 
 
 
 
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. 8, MMM AAA

2

1) matrix Ga,b deﬁned in Eq. 5,
3) constraints on the parameters, a = a0 · (1 + U[−.5,.5] ),

2) ξω (t) = ω · t,
b = b0 · (1 + U[−.5,.5] ),
ω = ω0 · (1 + U[−.1,.1] ), ϕ = ϕ0 + U[−.1,.1] where U[u,v ]

the fractal attractors of Rosler or Lorentz. We can suppose
that these shapes may also emerge in some traces produced
by nonstationary stochastic generative systems, but in a noisy
or hidden way, since the shapes are in this case accessible
through an observable which depends on the time variable.

Based on this notion of atemporal shape, we are interested
in the problem of the extraction of the shape (that is assumed
to be atemporal) and associated temporal functions, given a
subset of time series assumed to be produced by a stochastic
generative process.
In the second part of this paper, we formalize this problem
of shape/time separation for a restrictive category of stochastic
processes expressed in discrete time and detail the heuristic
approach that we develop to solve this problem, conjecturing
that
it
is NP-complete. The third part
is devoted to an
experiment which allows to evaluate initially the algorithmic
solution developed on synthetic data that we fully control. In
a second step we test our algorithm on real data as part of
on-line signature authentication tasks. In the last conclusive
section, we discuss our ﬁndings and the prospects that they
suggest.

I I . PROB L EM AND PRO PO SED SOLU T ION FORMA L I ZAT ION

A. Context
We consider the following G class of stochastic generative
processes that can be formalized in a parametric form:

o(t) = G(ξ (t)) + σ (t)

(3)
with t ∈ {0, 1, 2, · · · } the discrete time variable, ξ ∈ Ξ
a function, possibly stochastic, monotonously increasing with
t, G ∈ Γ a nonlinear function randomly drawn from Γ, o(t)
the observable output of the process at timestamps t and  a
Gaussian noise with zero mean and standard deviation σ . We
will denote such process (Γ, Ξ, σ ).
The set Γ will characterize what we call
variability and the set Ξ the temporal variability.

the shape

Thus, if we observe N distinct realizations of the previous
generative process, we get a set of N traces {oi (t)}i=1,··· ,N
such that:

∀i, oi (t) = Gi (ξi (t)) + i (t)

(4)

with Gi ∈ Γ, ξi ∈ Ξ and i a Gaussian noise.

In the absence of a strictly atemporal shape, we will call
(temporally) neutral shape associated to the process deﬁned
by Eq.4 the time series Os (t) = E (G(E (ξ (t)))), where E
represents the mathematical expectation, and t ∈ {0, 1, 2, · · · }.
For the neutral shape, the associated temporal function ξs (t)
corresponds to the mathematical expectation of observed ξ
functions.

As an example, the stochastic process deﬁned by

is the uniform law deﬁned on interval [u, v ], and
4) the additive Gaussian noise σ (t),
belongs to the G class of process, sets Γ and Ξ being
respectively deﬁned by the constraints on (a, b) and (ω , ϕ)
parameters.

(cid:20)a · cos(ξω (t) + ϕ(t))
0
0
b · sin(ξω (t) + ϕ(t))
Here, Γ = {Ga,b |a = a0 · (1 + U[−.25,.25] ), b =
b0 · (1 + U[−.25,.25] )} and Ξ = {ωt + ϕ|ω =

Ga,b (t) =

(cid:21)

(5)

ω0 · (1 + U[−.1,.1] ), ϕ = ϕ0 + U[−.25,.25]}.

The neutral

shape

Ga0 ,b0 (ω0 t + ϕ0 ).

for

this process

is Os (t) =

B. Statement of the separability problem
Given {oi (t)}i=1,2,··· ,N , N observations assumed to be
produced by a stochastic process class G ,
Can we estimate Γ, Ξ, Os and {ξi (t)}i=1,2,··· ,N
under the conditions that ∀i, oi (t) = Gi (ξi (t)) + i (t),
Gi ∈ Γ, ξi ∈ Ξ and i a Gaussian noise with zero mean?

Answering this question is to separate the neutral shape
from the temporal functions. This separation makes it possible
to consider the study of shape variability independently of
temporal variability.

C. Elements of heuristic solution to the separability problem
The general problem of separability as previously stated is
under-constrained (or ill-posed) and, as such, probably does
not admit a solution in the general case. On the other hand,
we empirically show that the algorithm proposed in [3] that
estimates an average time series of a set of time series using
temporally elastic kernel provides a way to approximate the
concept of neutral shape. Moreover, the probabilistic formal-
ization of the temporal alignment mechanism that is suggested
is particularly suited to address our separation problem.
We present below the general concepts of this algorithm
(for details, see [3]) and show how it offers elements of
answer to the previously stated problem of separability.

Unlike the dynamic time warping algorithm (DTW) [4]
which considers only the best alignment path to match pairs
of time series, the time elastic kernels [5], [6] consider the
sum of the alignment scores of all possible matching paths.
The score assigned to a path is the result of the product of the
local matching kernels evaluated along the path.
Let on
n(cid:48) be two time se-
ries (observations) with respective lengths n and n(cid:48) . The local

1 = o1 o2 · · · on and o(cid:48) n(cid:48)
1 = o(cid:48)
1 o(cid:48)

2 · · · o(cid:48)

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. 8, MMM AAA

3

j

j ) = e−ν ·||oi ,o(cid:48)

kernel that quantiﬁes the proximity of two samples oi and o(cid:48)
is in general an exponential kernel : k(oi , o(cid:48)
j ||2 .
By interpreting this local kernel as a local probability function
[3], it is possible to consider the alignment of two time series
as the mathematical expectation of the outputs generated by a
stochastic ﬁnite state machinery.
automata
The
considered
stochastic
is
a Hidden
Markov process deﬁned on a ﬁnite set of hidden states
characterizes the alignment between two samples oi and o(cid:48)
j ,
S1,1 is assimilated to the initial state and Sn,n(cid:48) as the ﬁnal
state.
The hidden variable (at step τ ) zτ takes value in S . The
index τ follows one of the admissible alignment paths and
takes value in {(1, 1), ..., (n, n(cid:48) )}. To take into account
monotonic alignment constraints (as in DTW), we impose

S = {S1,1 , S1,2 , · · · , Sn,n(cid:48) , Sn+1,n(cid:48)+1 }. Each state Si,j

τ = (i, j ), τ + 1 ∈ {(i, j + 1), (i + 1, j ), (i + 1, j + 1)} and
τ − 1 ∈ {(i, j − 1), (i − 1, j ), (i − 1, j − 1)}.

P (zτ = Si,j |on
1 , o(cid:48) n(cid:48)

The a posteriori probability for the process to be in state
Si,j at step τ , given the observed sequences on
1 est
1 , θ), where θ is the vector of parameters
of the Hidden Markov Model. This a posteriori probability is
estimated through forward and backward recursions, α and β
deﬁned as follows

1 et o(cid:48) n(cid:48)

1 , o(cid:48) t(cid:48)

t , o(cid:48) n(cid:48)

ατ (t, t(cid:48) ) = P (ot
1 , o(cid:48) t(cid:48)

βτ (t, t(cid:48) ) = P (on
t , o(cid:48) n(cid:48)

1 , zτ = St,t(cid:48) |θ) is the probability for
the process to be at state St,t(cid:48) at step τ once the partial
observation sequences (ot
1 ) are aligned.
t(cid:48) |zτ = St,t(cid:48) , θ) is the probability of
the alignment of the pair of partial sequences (on
t(cid:48) ) given
the alignment process is at state St,t(cid:48) at step τ .
The matching of any pair of samples oi and o(cid:48)
j can then
be interpreted as the probability of presence of the stochastic
alignment automata on cell Si,j .
The marginal probability for the process to be at step τ in
one of the states of the subset St,• = {St,1 , St,2 , · · · , St,n(cid:48) },
being given the observations on
1 and o(cid:48) n(cid:48)
1 , (that is, the proba-
bility for the process to visit at step τ one of the state of St,• ,
or ot to be aligned with one of the samples in the series o(cid:48) n(cid:48)
1 )
is given by:

1 , θ) = (cid:80)
P (zτ ∈ St,• |on
1 , o(cid:48) n(cid:48)

t(cid:48) P (zτ = St,t(cid:48) |on

1 , o(cid:48) n(cid:48)
1 , θ)

(6)
For all t and t(cid:48) , the conditional probability of visiting the state
St,t(cid:48) knowing the two series of observations, the parameter θ
and the subset St,• , in other words the probability that ot and
o(cid:48)
t(cid:48) are aligned given that ot is aligned with one of the samples
of the series o(cid:48) n(cid:48)
1 is:

P (zτ = St,t(cid:48) |on
1 , o(cid:48) n(cid:48)
1 , zτ ∈ St,• , θ) =

P (zτ =St,t(cid:48) |on
1 ,o(cid:48) n(cid:48)
1 ,θ)
P (zτ ∈St,• |on
1 ,o(cid:48) n(cid:48)
1 ,θ)

(7)

The mathematical expectation of alignments of samples in
the o(cid:48) n(cid:48)
series with the sample ot (given that ot is aligned

1

by the automaton) and similarly the expectation of the time
occurrences associated with the samples of the series o(cid:48) n(cid:48)
aligned with ot are deﬁned by:

1

E (o(cid:48) |ot ) ∝ n(cid:48)(cid:80)
E (t(cid:48) |ot ) ∝ n(cid:48)(cid:80)

t(cid:48)=1

t(cid:48)=1

o(cid:48)

t(cid:48) P (zτ = St,t(cid:48) |on

1 , o(cid:48) n(cid:48)
1 , zτ ∈ St,• , θ)
t(cid:48)P (zτ = St,t(cid:48) |on
1 , o(cid:48) n(cid:48)
1 , zτ ∈ St,• , θ)

(8)
The previous mathematical expectations (Eq. 8) are the basis
of the proposed procedure for estimating a time elastic centroid
for a set of time series.
Let O = {konk
1 }k=1···N be a subset of time series, rn
1 a
reference time series (rn
1 can be initialized with the medoid of
O). The centroid estimate of O is deﬁned by the tuple (Os , ξs )
where Os is a time series of length n and ξs is the sequence
of time occurrences associated to the sample of Os

Os (t) = 1

E (ko|rt )

N

N(cid:80)
N(cid:80)
N(cid:80)
N(cid:80)

nk(cid:80)
k=1
kt=1
nk(cid:80)
k=1
kt=1

k=1

k=1

∝ 1

N

∝ 1

N

ξs (t) = 1

N

koktP (zτ = St,kt |rn
1 , konk

1 , zτ ∈ St,• , θ)

E (kt|rt )
ktP (zτ = St,kt |rn

1 , konk

1 , zτ ∈ St,• , θ)

(9)
(Os , ξs ) is in general a non-uniformly sampled time
series: ξs (t) is the mathematical expectation of the time
of occurrence for sample Os (t). If necessary, a uniform
re-sampling can straightforwardly be used to get back to a
uniformly sampled time series.

By successive iterations,
i.e. by replacing the reference
time series rn
1 by the new centroid estimates Os evaluated at
the end of each iteration, until no more improvement can be
obtained (decrease in inertia), we get a ﬁnal estimate of the
centroid for O .

It should be noted here that
the underlying multiple
alignment problem being NP-complete [7] and characterized
with an exponential complexity [8] with the size of O ,
only sub-optimal heuristics allow to approach this notion of
temporally elastic centroid for sets O of more than tens of
time series.

We conjecture that, at
the end of the iterative process,
(Os , ξs ) as deﬁned by the equations Eq.9 is an empirical
estimator for the neutral shape associated to the set O .
Furthermore, equations 8 also provide access to temporal
function estimators ξi associated with the elements of O . Thus,
1 ∈ O , and the neutral shape Os estimated on O ,
the estimate of the temporal function ξi associated with oi is:

for oi = oi

ni

˜ξi (t) = E (t(cid:48) |Ct )
t(cid:48)P (zτ = St,t(cid:48) |Os

∝ ni(cid:80)

t(cid:48)=1

n

1 , oi

ni

1 , zτ ∈ St,• , θ)

(10)

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. 8, MMM AAA

4

Fig. 1. Top left sub-ﬁgure shows the variability of the 20 non-noisy ellipse shapes (theoretical neutral shape in red). Bottom left sub-ﬁgure presents the 20
noisy time series of references, the exact neutral shape (red curve and dashes), and the estimated neutral shape Os (black curve). Top midlle sub-ﬁgure shows
the (true) temporal variability of the temporal functions ξi (in red ξs ). Bottom middle sub-ﬁgure gives the estimated temporal functions ξi (in red ξs ). Top
right sub-ﬁgure corresponds to the true ξi functions associated to new noisy ellipse time series that have not been used to estimate the neutral shape. Bottom
right sub-ﬁgure is the estimation of the ξi functions associated to these noisy ellipses. For all sub-ﬁgures, the function ξs associated to the neutral shape is
shown in red color.

In other words, each ξi (t) corresponds to the mathematical
expectation of the alignment
times of the samples of the
series oi with the sample Os (t) of the neutral form.

In terms of algorithmic complexity, this algorithm is in
O(|O |.||Os ||2 ), that is to say quadratic with respect to the
average size of the time series and therefore of the size |Os |
of the neutral form, and linear with respect to the cardinal of

O .

I I I . EX PER IM EN TAT ION S

We detail hereinafter two experiments in order to empiri-
cally support conjecture and to illustrate how the algorithm
operates. The meta parameter ν of the local kernel is auto-
matically optimized on the learning data, such as avoiding the
convergences to zero of the calculated probabilities.

A. Synthetic dataset
We take again the ellipse example, previously introduced
in subsection II-A, and characterized by the process g ∈ G
deﬁned through equation 5 with the following parameter

values: ω0 = 2πf0 with f0 = 1hz and f e = 400hz the

sampling frequency, ϕ0 = 0, a0 = 2, b0 = 1, all the ellipses
being centered in (1, .5),  a Gaussian noise with standard
deviation σ = 1.5.

A subset of 20 time series is produced by g from which
the separation of shape and time functions is evaluated. The
results of the separation process are shown in Fig. 1.
To illustrate the variability of (non-noisy) shapes produced
by g , the sub-ﬁgure at the top left shows the projections of the
20 ellipses randomly generated by g . At the bottom right sub-
ﬁgure, are presented i) the noisy trajectories of the time series
produced by g (cyan curves), the theoretical neutral (mean)
shape (dashed red curve) and the neutral shape estimate (black
curve) provided by our algorithm.
At
the top center,
the sub-ﬁgure presents the temporal
variability by displaying the 20 true ξi temporal functions
associated with the previous shapes. The sub-ﬁgure at the
bottom center shows the estimated temporal functions ξi , the
red curve corresponding to the mean time curve associated
with the neutral shape.
Finally, the right sub-ﬁgures present new temporal functions
produced by g that violate the temporal constraints previously
ﬁxed. The true temporal functions are shown in the top
sub-ﬁgure, while the estimated temporal function are shown
in the bottom sub-ﬁgure. The red curve corresponds to the
neutral temporal curve ξs associated to the neutral shape Os
(f 0 = 1hz ). The cyan color curve corresponds to the estimate
of a function ξ generated with a frequency f that is twice
higher than f0 (f = 2hz ). The shape is thus traveled twice as
fast and the slope expected for the cyan curve is twice times

21012341.00.50.00.51.01.52.002468101214202468101214True ξi010020030040050060070080002004006008001000120014001600True imean xi1/2 slower2 fasteraccelerationdecelerationfreq. modulation64202468642024680246810121402468101214Estimated ξi010020030040050060070080002004006008001000120014001600Estimated imean xi1/2 slower2 fasteraccelerationdecelerationfreq. modulationJOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. 8, MMM AAA

5

lower than that of the red curve, which is approximately the
case for the estimation displayed in the ﬁgure. The black curve
corresponds to the estimate of a function ξ generated with a
frequency f twice as small as f 0 (f = 0, 5hz ). The shape
is therefore traveled half as fast as the neutral shape, and the
expected slope for the black curve is twice times greater than
that of the red curve, which is approximately the case for
the estimation presented in the ﬁgure. The blue dashed curves
correspond to temporal curves presenting constant acceleration
(below the red curve) and deceleration (above the red curve).
The shapes of these two curves are no longer linear, which is
also expected. Finally, the dashed green curve corresponds to a
frequency modulated xi curve, which thus presents successive
accelerations and decelerations. The ﬂuctuations are not very
well reproduced in the estimation of this curve, but
they
are nevertheless quite visible in the temporal curve that is
extracted by our algorithm.
This simple synthetic example, which nevertheless presents
a relatively important temporal and shape variability coupled
with an additive noise largely covering the neutral shape,
shows that the initial objective behind this notion of separation
of shape and time components within time series has some
empirical grounds. The concept of time elastic centroid makes
it possible, on this example, to approach this concept of neutral
shape and furthermore allows for the extraction of the temporal
functions associated to the shape utterances that are randomly
produced by a stochastic generative process g .

B. On-line handwritten signature forgery detection
We are interested here in some experiments related to the
identiﬁcation of forgeries of some online genuine signatures.
These signatures are collected using capture devices such as
digitizing tables, digital pens or touch screens. The data is in
the form of trajectories in Rd , with d ≥ 2 (including at least
positions x and y , and possibly pressure sensor output, stylus
or pen orientations, etc.)
The tasks we consider are semi-supervised classiﬁcation
tasks that can be considered as being similar to anomaly
detection tasks: only a few legitimate signatures are available
for learning, forgery signatures can be considered as anomalies
with respect to legitimate signatures.
The approach developed here consists in applying the sep-
aration algorithm on the training set, that is to say, to extract
from legitimate signatures the neutral shape component and
the temporal functions. From these shape and time compo-
nents, we then construct an overall dissimilarity score between
a test signature and our model that integrates a measure of
shape dissimilarity and a measure of temporal dissimilarity.
The shape dissimilarity between a test time series o and the
neutral shape Os is estimated by evaluating the mean squared
error of the differences between the samples of the neutral
shape Os (t) and the mathematical expectations of the samples
of time series o that are aligned with Os (t), as formalized by
equation Eq. 11.
|Os |(cid:88)

(E (o|Os (t)) − Os (t))2

δf (o, Os ) =

(11)

1

|Os |

t=1

The temporal dissimilarity is composed of the product
of two terms, as speciﬁed by equation Eq. 12. The ﬁrst
term evaluates the absolute difference between the normalized
averaged slope of temporal function ξo and unity. The averaged
slope is obtained by a linear regression estimated on the
temporal function. It is normalized using the mean slope S lope
estimated on the linear regressions of the temporal function
extracted from the training time series (which corresponds to
legitimate signatures).
The second term evaluates the absolute difference to unity
of the area under the curve (AUC) for temporal function ξo
normalized by the mean AUC, noted AU C , of the ξ functions
extracted on the training data.

δt (o, Os ) = (

S lope(ξo )
S lope

− 1)2 · (

AU C (ξo )
AU C

− 1)2

(12)

The global dissimilarity score correspond to the fusion of
the two previous terms as speciﬁed in equation Eq.13. The
meta parameter α is used to adjust weight of importance
between temporal and shape dissimilarities. This method for
separating shape and temporal functions in time series along
with the subsequent score aggregation model
is call STS
(shape and time separation) in the remaining part of the article.

δ(o, Os ) = α · log(1 + δf (o, Os )) + (1 − α) · log(δt (o, Os ) + 1)

(13)
As an illustration, we present in Fig. 2, the result of our
separating algorithm applied on a case extracted from the
MOBISIG dataset presented below. On the top left sub-ﬁgure,
the dark blue trajectory corresponds to the neutral shape,
superimposed to the curves that correspond to the legitimate
signatures used for training. On the top right sub-ﬁgure,
temporal functions extracted from legitimate signatures are
shown in cyan color, while temporal functions extracted from
forgery signatures are shown in red color. On this example,
most of the forgeries are characterized with a highly nonlinear
temporal function, whose slope greatly increases near the
middle of the signature realization. Moreover, comparatively
to genuine signatures, forgeries are produced with slower
temporal patterns. Clearly, on this example, the average slopes
and AUCs are signiﬁcantly higher for forgeries than for
genuine signatures.
In Fig. 2, bottom sub-ﬁgure, we show the 2D distributions
corresponding to the dissimilarity scores, with the temporal
dissimilarity in the x-axis and the shape dissimilarity in the
y-axis. One can notice that, for the legitimate signatures (blue,
cyan cluster), this 2D distribution is much more compact than
it is for the 2D distribution associated to forgeries (red cluster).
Furthermore, on this example, using the two dissimilarity
scores jointly enable us to ﬁnd a better separating hyperplane
between the two clusters comparatively to the case where only
one of the two scores is considered.
For the considered benchmarks, the assessment measures
that are used are the following ones:
1) EER : (equal error rate) gives the error rate obtained
when the false-positive rate is equal to the false-negative

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. 8, MMM AAA

6

3D trajectories and neutral shape

Temporal functions, {ξi (t)}

2D score distributions

Fig. 2. Example from the MOBISIG dataset. Top left sub-ﬁgure: neutral shape of a legitimate signature in dark blue, superimposed to the 3D trajectories
from which it has been estimated. Top right sub-ﬁgure: temporal functions extracted from the legitimate signatures used for training (cyan colored curves)
and from forgeries (red colored curves). Bottom sub-ﬁgure: 2D distributions of the dissimilarity scores ; x-axis the temporal dissimilarity scores, y-axis, the
shape dissimilarity score. The cyan cluster corresponds to the scores of the legitimate signatures while the red one corresponds to the scores of the forgeries

rate. In this conﬁguration, rates are evaluated globally,
i.e. when all subjects are treated together, without dis-
tinction.
2) aEER : (equal error rate) gives the average error rate ob-
tained when the false-positive rate is equal to the false-
negative rate. In this conﬁguration, rates are evaluated
subject by subject and then averaged.
3) FAR et FRR : true False Acceptance Rate and False
Rejection Rate obtained when operating at the closest
to the EER point.

The SVC2004 [9] dataset is the ﬁrst benchmark speciﬁcally
designed
for
evaluating
on-line
handwritten
signature
veriﬁcation systems. SVC2004 contains two distinct tasks:
the ﬁrst
task only exploits the 2D (x,y) trajectories that
are captured using a digitizing tablet
(WACOM Intuos
tablet) with a 100hz sampling frequency as well as the
pen-down/pen-up binary information, that tells whether the
contact between the pen and the tablet is established or not.
The second task exploits supplementary information including
the orientation of the pen. We have used the ﬁrst task to
determine a satisfactory value for meta parameter α (cf. Eq.
13). Using a cross-validation we have obtained best EER
values in average for α = .85. This α value has been used

(and maintain constant) to evaluate the STS approach on the
second MOBISIG task as well as for the processing of all the
other benchmarks described below.

The ICDAR2011 dataset [10] is made of 3D trajectories
(x, y , z ), produced by 10 subjects and captured using
digitizing tablet
Intuos3 (with a sampling frequency of
200hz ) and a pen. Here z contains the pressure exerted on
the pen.

The MOBISIG dataset [11] is made of pseudo-signatures
produced by 83 subjects using one of their ﬁngers and
captured using a mobile tablet equipped with a touch screen.
The signatures are captured with a sampling frequency of
60hz . The collected trajectories contain 2D positions x
and y , the speeds vx and vy , accelerations ax and ay the
pressure exerted on the touch screen z , and the size of the
contact area between the ﬁnger and the screen ta. We have
applied the STS approach on the trajectories containing the
previous features, without using the accelerations or the
speeds dimensions that are more or less already encoded into
the temporal functions we are extracting.

The pre-processing that has been implemented is common to

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. 8, MMM AAA

7

R E SU LT S OB TA INED FOR EACH B ENCHMARK S . TH E EVA LUAT ION M EA SURE S ARE G IV EN IN %

TABLE I

Benchmarks

SVC2004

ICDAR2011

MOBISIG (2017)

Methods

aEER

EdlA, [12]

SFT

EdlA Dutch [10]

SFT Dutch

EdlA Chinese [10]

SFT Chinese

EdlA meilleur EER [11]
EdlA meilleur aEER [11]

SFT

2.71

2.41

-
0.77
-
1.12
9.35
5.81

4.19

EER
-
7.44
-
3.18
-
3.44
14.31
29.76

5.86

FAR
-
7.43
3.44

3.09

6.94

3.69

-
-
5.86

FRR
-
7.45
3.86

3.27

6.40

3.20

-
-
5.86

all the datasets. Basically we remove the mean and normalized
the data using standard deviations for x, y and z (the pen
pressure). The other dimensions, if any, are normalized into
the unit interval using u = (u − minu )/(maxu − minu ).
Table Tab. I presents in a synthetic way results that have
been obtained on the three benchmarks that cover four distinct
tasks. Our algorithm (STS) achieves slightly better results
than the best methods that have been evaluated so far on these
tasks. These results are quite encouraging since the nature of
the capture devices as well as the cultural differences of the
subjects (European and Asian) are relatively diversiﬁed. The
state of the art is mostly composed with methods that are
derived from DTW for SVC2004 and MOBISIG benchmarks,
and with statistical methods or heuristics-based approaches
that are not detailed for the ICDAR2011 benchmark. Neural-
based approaches, particularly those involving deep learning
or recurrent architectures, seem poorly suited to these tasks
because of the limited size of the training sets.

The C++ code with a Python wraper is available at
https://github.com/pfmarteau/ShapeTimeSeparation/.

IV. CONC LU S ION

We have stated in this paper the problem of the separation
of shape and time components in time series. If, in its general
formulation, this problem is under-constrained (ill-posed), we
have shown empirically, on synthetic data consisting of noisy
ellipses,
that a heuristic approach constructed around the
notion of time elastic centroid can provide empirical solutions
to this problem. In particular, the proposed algorithm makes
it possible to identify a temporaly neutral shape and a set of
associated temporal functions that are coherent with respect
to the time series that are processed and close to our initial
expectations.
Furthermore, we have also evaluated the interest of this
separation in the scope of a signature authentication task
consisting in detecting forgeries from the knowledge of a small
set of genuine signatures. On three benchmarks implementing
capture devices of variable nature and precision, the proposed
approach, based on an aggregation of temporal and shape
dissimilarity scores, slightly improves the results obtained by
the best methods of the state of the art for each one of these
benchmarks. These results are encouraging as the dissimilar-
ity scores aggregating model that has been implemented is
somehow quite simple.

The perspectives of this work concern the study and the
modeling of the shape and temporal function variabilities in
time series for the purposes of recognition or synthesis of
shapes. The application aims are potentially very diverse,
we can mention for instance the generation of expressive
movements or realistic data that could be used to densify
training sets.
Moreover, the presented algorithm is based on a global
alignment principle, which is not adapted to the processing of
certain class of time series such as chaotic series (because of
the exponential dependence on the initial conditions). For such
series, a solution based on temporally and spatially localized
alignments could be possibly undertaken.

ACKNOW L EDGM ENT

The authors would like to thank...

R E FER ENC E S

[1] A. Andreopoulos and J. K. Tsotsos, “50 years of object recognition:
Directions forward,” Computer Vision and Image Understanding, vol.
117, no. 8, pp. 827 – 891, 2013.
[2] V. Niennattrakul, D. Srisai, and C. A. Ratanamahatana, “Shape-based
template matching for time series data,” Knowledge-Based Systems,
vol. 26, pp. 1 – 8, 2012.
[3] P.-F. Marteau, “Times
series averaging and denoising from a
probabilistic perspective on time-elastic kernels,” International Journal
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, vol. 29, no. 2, pp.
375–392, Jun. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://hal.archives- ouvertes.
fr/hal- 01401072
[4] H. Sakoe and S. Chiba, “A dynamic programming approach to contin-
uous speech recognition,” in Proceedings of the Seventh International
Congress on Acoustics, Budapest, vol. 3. Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó,
1971, pp. 65–69.
[5] M. Cuturi, J.-P. Vert, O. Birkenes, and T. Matsui, “A kernel for time
series based on global alignments,” in IEEE ICASSP 2007, vol. 2, April
2007, pp. II–413–II–416.
[6] P.-F. Marteau and S. Gibet, “On Recursive Edit Distance Kernels with
Application to Time Series Classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems, pp. 1–14, Jun. 2014.
[7] L. Wang and T. Jiang, “On the complexity of multiple sequence
alignment.” Jour. of Comp. Biology, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 337–348, 1994.
[8] W. Just and W. Just, “Computational complexity of multiple sequence
alignment with sp-score,” Journal of Computational Biology, vol. 8, pp.
615–623, 1999.
[9] D. yan Yeung, H. Chang, Y. Xiong, S. George, R. Kashi, T. Matsumoto,
and G. Rigoll, “Svc2004: First international signature veriﬁcation com-
petition,” in In Proceedings of the International Conference on Biometric
Authentication (ICBA), Hong Kong. Springer, 2004, pp. 16–22.
[10] M. Liwicki, M. I. Malik, C. E. v. d. Heuvel, X. Chen, C. Berger, R. Stoel,
M. Blumenstein, and B. Found, “Signature veriﬁcation competition for
online and ofﬂine skilled forgeries (sigcomp2011),” in 2011 Interna-
tional Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, Sep. 2011,
pp. 1480–1484.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. 8, MMM AAA

8

[11] M. Antal, L. Z. Szabó, and T. Tordai, “Online signature veriﬁcation on
mobisig ﬁnger-drawn signature corpus,” Mobile Information Systems,
vol. v, pp. 1–15, 2018.
[12] A. Sharma and S. Sundaram, “An enhanced contextual dtw based
system for online signature veriﬁcation using vector quantization,”
Pattern Recogn. Lett., vol. 84, no. C, pp. 22–28, Dec. 2016. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2016.07.015

