9
1
0
2

v
o

N

1
2

]

V

C

.

s

c

[

1
v
1
0
3
9
0

.

1
1
9
1

:

v

i

X

r

a

Image Aesthetics Assessment using Multi
Channel Convolutional Neural Networks

Nishi Doshi1 , Gitam Shikkenawis2 , and Suman K Mitra1

1 Dhirubhai Ambani Institute of Information and Communication Technology,
Gandhinagar, India

{201601408,suman mitra}@daiict.ac.in

2 C R Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science,
Hyderabad, India

gitam365@gmail.com

Abstract. Image Aesthetics Assessment is one of the emerging domains
in research. The domain deals with classiﬁcation of images into categories
depending on the basis of how pleasant they are for the users to watch.
In this article, the focus is on categorizing the images in high quality
and low quality image. Deep convolutional neural networks are used to
classify the images. Instead of using just the raw image as input, diﬀerent
crops and saliency maps of the images are also used, as input to the
proposed multi channel CNN architecture. The experiments reported on
widely used AVA database show improvement in the aesthetic assessment
performance over existing approaches.

Keywords: Image Aesthetics Assessment, Convolutional Neural Net-
works, Deep Learning, Multi Channel CNNs

1

Introduction

Image aesthetics is one of the emerging domains of research. Image Aesthetics
Assessment (IAA) problem deals with giving rating to images on the basis of
how pleasant they are for the user to watch. A human is more likely to feel happy
looking at a high quality picture rather than low quality images. On the basis
of aesthetic value of an image, it helps the user to identify whether he or she is
more likely to like the image and view the rest or not. It deals with ﬁnding out
the aesthetic quality of an image that is classifying an image as into the category
of either high quality image or low quality image.
A photo can be clicked from any device. Every device has certain resolu-
tion which results in the clarity in the pixels. Thus, use of diﬀerent devices for
clicking the photographs leads to the existence of this problem domain and its
classiﬁcation as well. It also depends on of the photo has been captured by the
photographer and the scene covered. To demonstrate this, a few images from the
AVA database [1] are shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2.
The aesthetics assessment problem has been used in many practical applica-
tions specially to attract the users by showing visually more appealing images.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

N. Doshi et al.

Fig. 1. Low quality images

Fig. 2. High quality images

Various search engines makes use of such a classiﬁcation. For a given search
word, it takes the aesthetic value of an image into consideration while showing
any image on top or showing it last. Review applications, which allow the users
to upload photographs and write review about the products/place also take aes-
thetics of the uploaded images into consideration. While displaying the review,
photos with high aesthetics quality or clicked from a high quality camera are
more likely to be shown ﬁrst compared to a photo clicked from a low quality
camera or having low aesthetic quality.
Being one of the recent problems, a lot of research work is going in the domain
of Image Aesthetics. Not only restricting the problem deﬁnition to classiﬁcation;
many variants of the problem statements exist and researchers are working on
the same. RAPID : Rating Pictorial Aesthetics using Deep Learning was one of
the earliest models used for classiﬁcation [6]. It was the model to propose use
of AlexNet architecture as well as double column architecture involving use of
global and local views of an image as an input to channels. In Brain Inspired
Deep Neural Network model [7], 14 style CNNs are pre-trained, and they are
parallelly cascaded and used as the input to a ﬁnal CNN for rating aesthetic
prediction, where the aesthetic quality score of an image is subsequently in-
ferred on AVA dataset [1]. Category Speciﬁc CNN having initially classiﬁcation
of images into diﬀerent classes and then corresponding to every class a diﬀerent
CNN architecture is trained to classify images into diﬀerent categories : either
high quality or low quality [2].

Image Aesthetics Assessment using Multi Channel CNNs

3

In this article, variants of multi column Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) are proposed. In particular, the novelty of the approach lies in using
informative inputs to the channels in multi column architecture. A pre-trianed
CNN architecture - VGG19 [9] on ImageNet database [8] is ﬁne tuned for image
aesthetics assessment. The images are classiﬁed into one of the two clasess, i.e.
high aesthetic quality or low aesthetic quality. The experiments are performed
on the widely used AVA databse [3].
The organization of the paper is as follows: Section 2 discusses deep CNN
architectures and ﬁne tuning the pre-trained deep networks. Variants of multi
channel CNN for IAA are discussed in Section 3. Experiments on AVA database
are reported in Section 4 followed by conclusions in 5.

2 Deep learning for IAA

In this paper, deep convolutional neural networks are used for assessing the
aesthetic quality of the images. In particular, widely used deep learning archi-
tectures namely Alexnet [4] and VGG19 [9] are used. The architectural details
of both networks are discussed in this section along with the procedure of ﬁne
tuning an already trained deep neural network.

2.1 CNN Architectures

Mainly two CNN column architectures were involved in the models designed to
classify the images : Alexnet and VGG19

AlexNet AlexNet architecture involves a total of 8 layers : 5 convolutional
layers and 3 fully connected layers. After every layer there is a ReLu function
calculation. RAPID [6] was the ﬁrst method that used AlexNet architecture for
solving the classiﬁcation problem for image aesthetics. The architecture can be
visualized by the Layer diagram in Figure 3.

VGG19 VGG19 is a convolutional neural network architecture that is already
trained on more than hundred million images of ImageNet database [8]. The
network is 19 layers deep and classiﬁes images into 1000 classes : some namely
mug, mouse, keyboard, pencil. In considering the architecture for training and
classifying images into two classes : High quality and Low quality images the
initial network architecture is kept the same and the fully connected layers are
changed to obtain classiﬁcation into 2 classes by adding 9 dense layers having
ReLu activation after Max Pooling layer of block 5.
The VGG19 architecture is divided into 5 blocks. Each block has certain
number of convolutional layers with each block ending with Max Pooling layer.
The number of convolutional layers per block are described in the Table 1.

4

N. Doshi et al.

Fig. 3. AlexNet Convolutional Neural Network architecture

Block Number
1 2 3 4 5
Number of convolutional layers 2 2 4 4 4
Table 1. Number of convolutional layers in diﬀerent blocks of CNN

2.2 Transfer Learning and Fine Tuning

As discussed in CNN architectures, the Deep networks have huge number of
parameters and training them requires very large databases. If large enough
datasets are not available, transfer learning is shown to be working very well. In
transfer learning, a model trained on a large and general dataset is used as the
base generic model for new application. Thus, the learned features maps are used
without having to start from scratch training a large model on a large dataset.
In transfer learning, the weights of the convolution layers are used as it is, only
the soft max layers are re-trianed to give desired output.
In case of ﬁne tuning, instead of using ﬁxed weights, top convolutional layers
are made traininable. Along with fully connected soft max layers, some of the
initial weights of convolutional layers (the layers near the fully connected layers
that is the last last of the layers of the network) are also updated.
In the current proposal, instead of training the deep CNN from scratch, pre-
trained VGG19 network on ImageNet database is used as the base network. Top
CNN layers and fully connected layers are re-trained to solve the problem of
classiﬁcation of images on the basis of their aesthetic value.

3 Multi Channel CNN based Image Aesthetic Assessment

The conventional methods of ﬁne tuning a pre-trained deep network involve
giving the original image as input to the single channel network and predict the
high/low aesthetic quality. However, as suggested in [6], instead of taking just
the input image for assessing the quality, considering global and local views of

Image Aesthetics Assessment using Multi Channel CNNs

5

the image in a double column network enhances the classiﬁcation performance
of the IAA technique. In this section, various image pre-processing and feature
selection procedures are discussed. Based on the observations made, a double
and triple column architecture for IAA is proposed.

3.1 Image Pre-processing and Feature Selection

As already designed deep CNN architectures are used in this article, the sizes of
the images to be given as input are ﬁxed, hence the images are required to be
resized according to the speciﬁcations of respective networks. Both Alexnet and
VGG19 support input sizes of 224 × 224 whereas AVA dataset contains images
with diﬀerent sizes. Hence, all the images were resized to 224 × 224. In addition
to resizing the original image, input images by padding and cropping various
portions are generated to negate the eﬀects of scaling and resizing. Also, instead
of using the raw image as a input, saliency map are used as input to one of the
channels. These pre-processing and feature selection techniques are discussed in
the following section.

Original Image As both VGG19 and AlexNet architectures require images of
size 224 × 224 as input, the images of the dataset were resized to the desired
input size. As the pixels become blur after resizing, the aspect ratio of image
was taken into consideration while resizing.

Padded Images To negate the impact of aspect ratio, image was initially
to 224 × 224. For example an image of 512 × 1024 dimensions was ﬁrst converted
padded with zeros to make it a square image. And then the image was resized
to image of size 1024 × 1024 by padding the image on top and bottom with 256
zeros, and then this 1024 × 1024 was resized to 512 × 512 image.

Cropped portion of Image Human eyes generally do not look at the entire
image as a whole. In computational aspects, crops of image can be used to de-
tect such portions which can be focus of human eye and be responsible for the
judgement about the image. In this paper, diﬀerent cropping techniques are used
to capture the essence of the image instead of resizing it to ﬁt the input size.
Center Crop
Center portion of the image is cropped and given as input to channel [6]. The
reason to take center crop of 224 × 224 size is that when a person looks at the
picture; it is the center most part of the image where eyes of a human rest ﬁrst.
Human eye tends to see the center position of the image most rather than being
focused on corner parts of an image. Hence, considering the center crop of the
image would lead to decide relevant features for channel and help towards a
better classiﬁcation into two classes.
Random Crop
Instead of using the ﬁxed center crop, three random cropped patches of size

6

N. Doshi et al.

224 × 224 were generated for images. A novelty added to this approach was
reﬁning the algorithm to generate random crops. While generating these three
crops, two things were taken into consideration: (1) it is not the center crop of
the image and (2) it does not overlap with other random crops already taken. If
the random cropped patches belonged to similar portion of the image, misleading
results may be produced as same images are passed in both channels of the net-
work. Hence, the current proposal takes into consideration that when generating
random cropped patches of 224 × 224, the distance between the center of crops
has to be more than a threshold, so that two crops belonging to same region or
image are not generated. A distance of 100 was kept for x and y coordinate of
the generated crop image and previously generated crops of the image.

Saliency Map of Image While viewing an image, humans do not treat the
entire scene equally, mostly the focus is on visually appealing parts. Saliency
deals with unique features of image related to visual representation of an image.
The saliency map highlights the pixels which have more visual importance in
the image. It elaborates the part of image to which our brain gets attracted the
most.
Here, we have considered use of static saliency map detection as images are
static in nature. Two types of static saliency maps are taken into consideration.

Spectral Residual Map
The algorithm analyzes the log-spectrum of an image, extracts the spectral resid-
ual and proposes a fast method to construct spectral residual saliency map which
suggests the positions of visually attracted spots of an image.
Fine grained Map
Human eyes have retina which consists of two types of cells : oﬀ center and on
center. Specialty of these two types of cells are as follows :

– On center : It responds to bright areas surrounded by dark background.
– Oﬀ center : It responds to dark areas surrounded by bright background.

Fine grained saliency map is generated by taking considering the on center
and oﬀ center diﬀerences [10].
Spectral residual and ﬁne grained saliency maps have been shown in Figure

4.

Thus, various ways of pre-processing and feature extraction from the original
input image have been discussed in this Section. Next part discusses using these
processed images as input to multi channel CNNs.

3.2 Proposed multi channel CNN for IAA

Instead of working on a single channel with the raw image as input, in this article,
we have used pre-processed images as discussed before in this Section as input
along with the raw image. Thus, building a multi channel convolutional neural
network architecture. Experiments have been performed on doble and triple

Image Aesthetics Assessment using Multi Channel CNNs

7

Fig. 4. In order from left : Original high quality image taken from PhotoQuality
Dataset [5], corresponding spectral residual saliency map and ﬁne grained saliency
map.

column networks. The conﬁguration details of both the networks are discussed
below:

Double Column Network The double column network involves use of two
pipelines and concatenation of those channels to generate output classiﬁer. In
one part of the network : original form of the image, the padded form of the im-
age and the center cropped form of an image are supplied whereas in the second
part of network three variants of random cropped forms of images are given.

In case of AlexNet architecture; initially trained single column network is
used as base model for both channels. The parameters after concatenating are
trained for 300 epochs and then ﬁne tuning is carried out by making the 4th and
5th convolutional layers trainable.

In case of VGG network; a pre-trained VGG19 network on ImageNet dataset
is taken as the base network for both the channels. As in cale of AlexNet, 4th
and 5th convolutional layers are ﬁne tuned for image aesthetics assessment task.

Triple Column Network The triple column network involves use of three
pipelines and concatenation of those channels to generate output classiﬁer. There
is an addition of third pipeline to double column network where two variants of
saliency maps that is spectral residual map and ﬁne grained maps are passed.

VGG19 network is only trained for this column network. VGG19 network
which had two channels already trained for double column network were used as
base model and for third channel; single column network model was used as base
model. After concatenating the results of all the three channels the classiﬁcation
of images into high quality and low quality was done. The network design for
triple column network is shown in Figure 5.

8

N. Doshi et al.

Fig. 5. Triple column network design

4 Experiments

There are many datasets available for testing the validity of the model designed
to solve the image aesthetic assessment problem. In this paper, the experimental
results are reported on one of the most used database for IAA i.e. AVA dataset
[3].

AVA Dataset AVA Dataset[3] consists of images which have votes of users for
every rating 1 to 10. As the model developed is for classifying images into two
categories : high and low. The ratings were assigned to images on the basis of
maximum number of votes corresponding to that image. The number of images
corresponding to each rating are as follows :

Table 2. Number of images in AVA dataset corresponding to each and every vote

Rating
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 Total images
Number of images 566 104 1083 24305 147483 74294 6824 743 31 97
255530

As it can be seen from Table 2, out of 255530 images, 147483 that is around
58% images belong to rating 5. Hence, the images belonging to rating 1, 2, 3
and 4 were considered low quality images and images with rating 7, 8, 9 and 10
were considered high quality images.

4.1 Comparison with various approaches

Experiments using single column VGG19 and AlexNet architectures were car-
ried out on AVA dataset. In case of AlexNet, the network is trained from scratch

Image Aesthetics Assessment using Multi Channel CNNs

9

for image aesthetic assessment whereas for VGG19, a pre-trained model on Im-
ageNet dataset is used. Here, the pre-trianed works as the base model and it
is ﬁne tuned for aesthetics assessment on AVA database. The results in terms
of accuracy are reported in Table 3. It can be observed that there is signiﬁcant
improvement in testing accuracy in case of VGG19 as compared to AlexNet.
Hence, the double and triple column CNN experiments have been performed by
using the VGG19 architecture as the base CNN architecture.
The results obtained after using double and triple channel CNNs are reported
in Table 3. It can be observed that more that more 7% enhancement in the testing
accuracy is obtained using triple channel CNN over the double channel CNN. It
shows that addition of saliency map as feature boost the IAA performance.
For fair comparison, results on AVA dataset using a few existing deep neural
network based approaches namely SCNN [6], DCNN [6] and BDN [7] have also
been reported in Table 3. It can be observed that the proposed triple channel
architecture surpasses all three compared approaches.

Table 3. Diﬀerent Architectures and Network results on AVA Dataset

Architecture
Network
AlexNet
Single Column
VGG19
Single Column Network
VGG19 Double Column Network
VGG19
Triple Column Network

Train accuracy Test Accuracy
0.993
0.6164
0.9987
0.7137
0.8082
0.7444
0.92
0.823

Table 4. Comparison with existing results on AVA dataset

Network
Signle Column Network (SCNN) [6]
Double Column Network (DCNN) [6]
Brain Inspired Deep Neural Network (BDN) [7]
Triple Column Network

Accuracy
71.20
73.25
78.08
82.3

5 Conclusions

After conducting various results on AVA dataset for diﬀerent architectures and
observing the results, we came to a conclusion that increasing the number of
columns in the architecture did give us better results compared to single col-
umn architecture results. We also observed that compared to other proposed

10

N. Doshi et al.

architectures like SCNN [6], DCNN [6] and BDN [7], triple column architecture
showed the best results that is 82.3% accuracy was achieved. The ma jor reason
for achieving such a high accuracy was due to the fact of involving diﬀerent
forms of images such as cropped, padded and saliency maps. Giving balanced
and equal weights to these forms of an image helped to train the network more
eﬃciently.

References

1. Y. Deng, C. C. Loy and X. Tang, ”Image Aesthetic Assessment : An experimental
survey” in IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 2017, pp. 80-106.
2. G. Lihua and L. Fudi, ”Image Aesthetic Evaluation using Parallelled Deep Convo-
lution Neural Network” in 2016 International Conference on Digital Image Com-
puting: Techniques and Applications (DICTA), 2016
3. N. Murray, L. Marchesotti, and F. Perronnin, ”AVA: A large-scale database for aes-
thetic visual analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition (CVPR), 2012, pp. 24082415.
4. A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, ”ImageNet classiﬁcation with deep
convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 25, Neural Information Processing Systems Foundation, 2012, pp. 10971105.
5. W. Luo, X. Wang, and X. Tang, ”Content-based photo quality assessment,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision (ICCV), 2011, pp. 22062213.
6. X. Lu, Z. Lin, H. Jin, J. Yang, and J. Z. Wang, ”RAPID: Rating pictorial aesthetics
using deep learning,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2014, pp. 457466.
7. Z. Wang, F. Dolcos, D. Beck, S. Chang, and T. S. Huang, ”Brain-inspired deep
networks for image aesthetics assessment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.04155, 2016.
8. O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpa-
thy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, A. C. Berg, L. Fei-Fei ”ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge”. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 2015,
pp. 115, 211252.
9. K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman ”Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition”.
10. B. Wang and P. Dudek A Fast Self-tuning Background Subtraction Algorithm, in
proc of IEEE Workshop on Change Detection, 2014

